ladies and gentlemen Chris Kresser Joe
good EVP wait buddy good to see ya
we are here because of the film the game
changers I watched it I watched it today
I watched the whole thing from start to
finish and I have to say before we even
start I liked the guy who's in it very
much James Wilkes very nice guy he's an
excellent fighter he won the ultimate
fighter and I don't think he's a bad
person I've only had a little bit
interaction with him just over the past
couple days via email he seems like a
really great guy
yeah a very good guy genuine I I would
we're gonna talk we're just gonna get
into it so listen what what was your
thoughts on the film and what did what
stood out immediately okay so a little
bit of context you know I think this
film was the best of all the vegan
documentaries that have been made I'll
just say that up front I think it's
pretty well done as a film yes you know
it's got a big-budget pretty good
storyline and Cameron Jackie Chan lots
of celebrity you know it's good graphics
like it's just a well-made film yeah and
I think it's especially for someone who
doesn't have the background to you know
or science awareness to critique some of
the claims it's going to be really
persuasive and compelling and I've
definitely you know whenever a film like
this comes out my email inbox just blows
up like I've seen this film what oh my
god you know I'm eating meat I'm gonna
kill myself and right it's just like
famous cigarettes right and you know I
was talking to Jamie about it before we
started recording like I could set my
watch to it every year there's something
like this happens and I've got to do a
response I consider it part of mine it's
part of my public you think that they're
making these films cuz they believe what
they're saying
or do you think they're making these
films because they are trying to convert
people to being vegan and they think
that distorting reality and just bending
things and cherry-picking data is
acceptable because the long run the
benefits of getting the world to shift
over to a vegan diet it's worth not
being completely objective or honest
about the actual facts no I think they
believe it I think people like I mean
James for example I think he's genuinely
trying to help people
I think he's looked at the data and he
just came to a different conclusion then
somebody like me has and you know I mean
this is there's something called
confirmation bias and I'm sure many of
your guests have talked about but it's a
basic human tendency where we we tend to
only look at the data that support our
point of view and discount the rest of
it right and it's you know even really
really good scientists have a hard time
overcoming not everybody is guilty of it
to some degree including me but I think
yeah so I think generally the people who
are making these films really believe in
it they they believe in the the power of
vegan diet you know from a nutrition
perspective and they also believe that
it's going to help save the world the
beginning of it I thought was so strange
when James talked about being injured
and doing all the research they did
which seems like an extraordinary amount
of really see it like a thousand hours
of research and that the thing that
stood out was that the Roman gladiators
at least in this one particular location
according to the analysis of their bones
it appears that they had a vegetarian
diet yeah there's a lot of grain that
was strange too I mean first of all
gladiators were basically prisoners of
war criminals so the diet they're being
fed isn't prison food yeah it's their
slaves that are forced to fight to the
death they had a life expectancy of
about two years once they became a
gladiator
and it's interesting they featured
Fabien Kahn's who is the scientist you
remember who they talked to and
definitely seemed to kind of buy into
the plant-based diet
idea or the idea that they were
vegetarian you know by design or by
choice and they didn't talk to his
collaborator called Carl Gershman who's
been quoted in the media saying you
a quote and by the way all of the
references full bibliography show notes
everything are at crecer dot CEO slash
game-changers because I want this to be
totally evidence-based people can check
what I'm saying right there so he said
the vegetarian diet had nothing to do
with poverty or animal rights
gladiators it seems were fat consuming a
lot of simple carbohydrates such as
barley and legumes like beans was
designed for survival in the arena
packing in the carbs also packed on the
pounds
gladiators needed subcutaneous fat a fat
cushion protects you from cut wounds and
shields nerves and blood vessels in a
fight so they were basically fattening
them up so they could survive longer in
in the arena it's not an ideal diet for
you know fighting and muscle protein
synthesis and nutrition it was basically
to fatten them up so they could survive
longer this seems so obvious that I
couldn't believe it was actually in the
film and it seemed it just seemed
blatantly deceptive because everyone
knows what their life was it's not like
these were these elite athletes that
were competing in the Olympic Games
these were people that they were sending
out to die for other people's enjoyment
right and the name I'm my Latins
terrible I bet I think it was a whore
tre or something I mean it's like barley
eater yes it was an epithet it was an
insult it wasn't you know a compliment
it was like haha you can you only can
afford to eat barley yeah so yeah I was
a bizarre way to start the film I
thought there could have been better
ways to do it and let me also just say
like if this film if the purpose of this
film was to say it's possible to thrive
on a plant-based diet and look here's
some athletes that have done that I
wouldn't have had any qualms with it
clearly there are examples of people who
thrive on a plant-based diet yes if you
follow the diet correctly can be done
rich role we talked about last time
Scott Jurek who's one of the athletes in
the film seem to do well doggie Bausch
who's one of the athletes in the film if
you really plan it well and you
understand what you're doing and you're
on it it's totally possible I no dispute
with that but where I take issue with it
is it went a step further and said this
is the optimal
diet for athletes and everybody else
which you know even though it was a film
ostensibly about athletes it definitely
crossed the line into this is the
approach that everybody should do yeah I
mean they made these claims like all the
sudden people got stronger and faster
and more endurance like there's no
evidence to support that there's no
evidence other than there are anecdotal
statements of what they did there's no
one has ever put anyone on a vegan diet
and then run them through extreme
endurance tests and found a significant
increase in vo2 max or muscle strength
or any of those things none of this has
ever been done so if it's if it's true
anecdotally for these people it would
have been really interesting if there
was some actual data to go with that
where they showed studies right I mean
we have James talking about his ability
to do the battle ropes but all of a
sudden he could do an hour and before he
could only do ten minutes well I find
that really hard to believe that you
gained fifty minutes of your battle rope
time just from ropes and if that was the
only thing in the film that I've found
hard to believe you know I'd have to let
it go I mean the guy's an athlete he's
an amazing athlete was a great fighter
he's got fantastic endurance is
excellent martial arts technique I would
just buy it at face level or at face
value but there's a lot of those there's
a lot and then I mean we can go through
it and talk about I mean there's that
problem which is there's no
peer-reviewed evidence to back that up
but even the anecdotal evidence is a
little shaky is when we start to talk
about some of the athletes in the film
and there are also examples of athletes
outside of the film who you know switch
to a vegan diet and we look and see what
happened to them after they did that the
problem here is something that I call
the vegan honeymoon which is you know
you take someone who's been on a
standard American diet they're eating
KFC McDonald's etc and they switched
from that to a plant-based diet well of
course they're gonna feel better they've
gone from eating absolute crap to real
foods yes and so for a period of time
they're going to feel better for sure
but then what happens over a longer
period of time you know so I'm not
getting enough protein just in terms of
quantity and not getting the right
quality of protein that starts
have an impact micronutrient
deficiencies you know
vitamin A zinc calcium iron things like
that take a while to develop so you're
not going to see that decline in
performance happen right away it might
take three months it might take six
months might take nine months it depends
on all kinds of factors genetics health
status going into it the type of
exercise and activity that they're doing
the way they're implementing the diet
etc so you have to not just look at what
happens a month after someone goes vegan
you have to look at what happens six
months a year after or two years after
and we can look at specific examples of
that so in the absence of the correct
amount of amino acids a correct amount
of specific nutrients you start to see a
slow decline right so and this is
something that they're not taking into
account yeah one of the things they
talked about was protein content and I
immediately knew that this was not
correct or that they're being deceptive
they were talking about three ounces of
steak versus what are they compared
peanut butter sandwich and maybe some
lentils is that what it was oh boy well
the problem is the amino acid profile of
that steak is far superior the amount of
protein that your body absorbs is far
superior it's said that you're talking
about a completely different thing this
is known science you can get as many
amino acids from plant-based proteins
but you Edin need to eat a higher
quantity you know right that's that's
what's important not the overall grams
of protein it's the quality of the
protein what's the amino acid of the
profile of the protein and how does your
body absorb it again this does not mean
like I'm a giant fan of hemp protein I
eat that stuff all the time it's great
it's just you can't say that protein
grams are equal to protein grams because
they're not no but it's even worse than
that Jamie pull-ups live for if you can
there's I made some graphics here
because it's sometimes easier to
understand when you're looking at a
picture so for the peanut butter
sandwich thing it was like there's a
there's the same amount of protein in a
peanut butter sandwiches there is in
three ounces of beef so I looked up the
data of course
so three ounces of 90 percent lean
ground beef has 24 grams of protein you
get two slices of wheat bread will give
them the benefit of the
that it's whole-wheat not white bread
that's 5 grams 1 tablespoon of peanut
butter is 4 grams so you'd have to have
5 tablespoons of peanut butter in that
sandwich to equal 3 ounces of beef
that's 1/3 of a cup of peanut butter
it's a lot of fun you ever made a peanut
butter sandwich with 1/3 cup of you've
probably have but I'm a glutton and
that's 600 calories yeah versus 200
calories from the ground beef for the
just for the same amount same routine
just quantity I'm not even getting into
quality and I'm gonna get into that in
fact we're just talking about quantity
approach but I think they were saying
peanut butter sandwich and a cup of
lentils right wasn't the combined no I
think they said 3 or or a cup of lentils
or was more yeah so would plus a couple
of yeah yeah then as you pointed out
it's all about protein quality and this
as you said this is an established
science firmly established science they
look at this especially like in third
world countries where protein deficiency
is common so to try to figure out how to
address that what are the highest
quality proteins that we can feed these
people to bring them up to where they
should be in terms of protein intake so
the the most recent scale that's used is
called Adeus digestible indispensable
amino acid score so it ranks proteins
according to two main categories one is
the amino acid profile and as you
mentioned when it comes to protein
quality it's not just does the protein
have every amino acid you know this is
what's a little disingenuous about the
film they said every plant protein has
every amino acid well yeah nobody it
disagrees with that but does it have
enough of each of them that's the key
question what's the quantity what's the
profile so the DIA slicks an amino acid
profile but then it also looks at
bioavailability protein is not worth
worth much if you can't actually digest
and absorb it so it's a complex you know
algorithm that combines all those things
and that ranks the proteins on a scale
so the Dia's for beef rare beef is 1.3 9
it's among the highest scores on the
whole scale the Dia's for egg is 1.13
for peanut butter at 0.45 and for wheat
at 0.2 those are among the lowest
proteins there that have been measured
on the scale so even if the quantity was
the same the effect on your body
particularly on things like muscle
protein synthesis which is of concern
you know for athletes is not even in the
same ballpark and when they're talking
about the u.s. RDA they're talking about
like how much you know the United States
recommended daily allowances that is
isn't that just to be healthy like to be
a lot unhealthy but to be alive there's
being a lot more accurate it's the avoid
it's the amount that's required to avoid
malnutrition right and clean so thanks I
know that yeah right so I'm you know why
don't they know that I'm not doing any
documentaries on food why don't they
know that seems like so - use that as a
reference point to use that as like look
you can get this that's plenty that's
crazy well that's a common argument in
the vegan community and they you know I
don't know whether it's because they
they really don't understand the science
behind it or because they do and they're
just you know it's being kind of
exaggerated to suit the their claim I
can't know that you know this is what I
think it is honestly there's a lot of
vegan influencers and there's a lot of
people that make youtube videos and
people who produce things like this and
then the other folks just parrot what
they say right so instead of reading the
actual studies and talking to objective
researchers who have gone over the
evidence and disputed the claims that
are in these films like a debunking of
one of these films will get way less
views right then the actual film itself
that's just how it goes nobody's gonna
watch and so especially the people that
already convinced for them it's like
excellent I knew Jesus was real now I've
got the proof you know I mean it's
really like that it becomes the ideology
becomes so strong it becomes like a
religion and look I've been accused of
it from doing it from a meat perspective
I understand I understand that you would
think that if you had an opposing vegan
or vegetarian perspective like I totally
understand but man
you know we'd be sorry for that with a
joke on discussion and you see it on
almost every time someone who's actually
informed has a conversation with one of
these influencers like they're not being
a hundred percent accurate objective or
even honest in a lot of cases yeah I
mean there's a great Leon Festinger
quote I know if you've heard it a man
with conviction is a hard man to change
tell him you disagree and he turns away
show him the facts and figures any
questions your sources appeal to logic
and he fails to see your point
the best argument in my opinion is this
factory farming is disgusting and that
the cruelty of treating animals like
like a commodity and serving them up for
slaughter in these horrific conditions
these factory farming conditions and
these horrible pens that we've all seen
that's the argument for veganism I agree
when we're talking about performance and
health this is where it just gets very
frustrating for me it was like if you
want to make an argument that you should
probably follow a more complicated diet
more complicated meaning that it's more
difficult for you to acquire in some
cities you have to be a little bit more
careful about getting supplementation
with vitamin b12 and an essential amino
acid it's got to be a little bit more
careful if you want to maintain a
healthy robust life it's possible to do
that but it's a little more complicated
and if you want to say I want to live
like that because the way I feel about
eating animals makes me feel terrible I
don't want to have any part of that and
I found out that I can not have a part
of that and I can live my life that's
great but that's not what they're saying
no and there's a lot of problems with
that argument too I want to come back
and spend some chew on that but I don't
do it right now before we move on
because it's a we just covered it all
right can so I want to go back to the
end I'm gonna push back because I'm
super important yes yeah so where to
start with that so first of all you know
that the idea that plant-based
agriculture doesn't kill animals it's
just false I mean there have been
studies that show that particularly mono
cropping type of plant agriculture kills
far more animals and are killed in you
know from eating
cows for example insects rodents
you know mice birds fish all you know
killed in the process of industrial
agriculture and so that presents an an
ethical dilemma really if you are saying
I'm a vegan because I don't want my food
choices to involve killing animals is
killing you know a whole bunch of small
non mammal animals better than killing
mammals or what about killing more small
animals than one cow right is is that
the size matter does it you know where
do you draw the line between an animal
that is like sentient enough or cute
enough maybe to not be killed versus let
me clarify what you're saying - you're
saying more animals per meal so you like
if you want to have a meal out of wheat
you're most likely more animals are
going to die than if you want to say if
you have a hundred meat wheels me wheat
meals rather 100 meals with wheat in
them you're probably killing more
animals and if you have a hundred meals
with cows in them because that's like a
cow yeah I don't know the answer to that
question I just I'm comparing kind of
the whole process
you know like eating animals versus
eating plants and and I don't know if
that per meal comparison has ever been
done but I'm just saying that that's an
interesting ethical question let me give
you their argument for that they say
that most of these mono crops are to
feed animals yeah that is a problem I
mean I where I agree with this film is
that conventional livestock practices
are harmful but what they're saying is
that you're saying that eating a vegan
diet and all these mono crops that these
mono crops are killing all these small
animals they're saying no these mono
crops most of them actually exist to
feed livestock that's that's not true I
mean if you follow this through I mean
especially when you start talking about
like fake meat and some you know yeah
they're all what what are those based on
soils yeah yeah their industrial crops
their
not you know growin on the family farm
these are industrial GMO mono crops
massive mass on a massive scale there
was a great study published in the
journal penis in 2017 and that it was
specifically addressing this claim of
wood removing animal products from our
diet have you know saved the world
basically would it reduce greenhouse
gases would it improve our nutrition
basically they found that it would only
reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 2.6
percent but our intake of carbohydrates
total calories would go way up and the
incidence of nutrient deficiencies would
go way up and they did the math and
found that without animal products
domestic supplies of calcium epa and DHA
went through the long-chain omega-3 fats
retinol and b12 work quote insufficient
to meet the requirements of the u.s.
population so translation everybody
would have to be supplementing with
those nutrients if everyone went on a
vegan diet and they went on to say that
basically the there's already a surplus
of calories in the diet of a hundred and
forty five percent if everyone went if
we removed animal products entirely that
would go up to two hundred and thirty
percent so that because the volume of
calories and food that would be required
to meet basic nutrient and protein needs
would be that much higher so you know
there's a lot of downstream consequences
that I don't think have been fully
thought through even if a plant-based
diet might work for one person does it
will it scale you know if you if you
take that to the full level like
everyone eating a plant-based diet which
is the argument that is being made does
it really work from a nutritional
perspective from an from an
environmental perspective and even from
an ethical perspective the environment
the environmental perspective is
legitimate they both cause environmental
damage both animal agricultural and
plant agriculture there's industrial
industrial practices cause environmental
damage and if you want to feed 320
million people you're not going to do it
through organic farms
you're gonna you're gonna have to I mean
you can grow food in your neighborhood I
mean if you live in a small town you
guys can have a co-op you can have food
in your backyard that you can grow but
if you're living in a city like Los
Angeles it's highly likely your food is
not coming from that city itself so that
that means it has to be grown and if
you're gonna grow food for 20 million
people you need a giant chunk of land if
you need that giant chunk of land even
if everybody's eating vegan that means
wildlife is gonna be 2 plays displays
the the area where you're growing crops
it's going to be a mono crop culture
you're not gonna have all these plants
living together like they do in the wild
that's just not how you grow food for 20
million people in a very specific area
you just don't do that yeah I know you
had Joel Salatin on the show back and
and Allan savory talked a lot about this
that you know one of the biggest issues
right now is soil soil erosion soil is
eroding you know that the FAO is said we
only have about sixty harvests left if
soil continues to degrade at the rate
that it's going and so one of the
arguments for regenerative holistically
managed livestock is that that can
actually help reject regenerate healthy
soils and some like Joel Salatin or Alan
Cirie would argue that that's the only
way we're gonna be able to feed the
world because only about six about 60%
of available land is not suitable for
cropping even if we decided hey let's
just plant soy and corn and and you know
plant plants everywhere we couldn't
because it's too rocky or hilly or the
soils not adequate to do that but it
could be used for livestock there's a
thing that they keep saying that you
brought up slightly you touched on it a
little bit earlier the thing is that
greenhouse gases and they were talking
about the greenhouse gases from meat and
it's just a fake number I mean it's over
the top it's over the top not true yeah
the specific numbers nine percent for
all agriculture all agriculture
including growing crops the vast
majority of all of our greenhouse gas
issues are coming from transportation
and from industry this is this is
undisputable so this this is where I
wonder too about like whether it's is
this dissing gently
is this that are they not aware of the
what's happening here or is it
disingenuous because so so here's the
thing here's what they did Joe so that
the number in this specific number in
the film they say greenhouse gas
emissions from Callao or 15 percent and
that and they compared that to 14
percent for all of transportation but
the problem with that is that they're
using the full lifecycle analysis for
cat for livestock so that means you know
the carbon needed for feed for transport
for processing the cattle not just
emissions not just methane burps from
the cattle
whereas for transportation they're only
looking at what it were called direct
tailpipe emissions just the emissions
that come out of the tailpipe they're
not looking at the carbon needed to
manufacture the vehicle the cars the
buses the airplanes the inputs for
making the fuel the fuel production and
distribution the final use of the fuel
that life cycle analysis for
transportation hasn't been done just
because it's enormous ly complex and it
would be a phenomenally big number the
EPA is estimated that something around
80 percent of the greenhouse gas
emissions comes from industry basically
fossil fuel so there it's not an apples
to apples comparison they're right
they're doing the full lifecycle for
livestock versus just the direct
emissions for transportation well if we
look at just the direct for both it's 5%
for livestock globally and 14% for
transportation but in the u.s. it's only
three point nine percent for livestock
because we have more efficient practices
here versus 14 percent for
transportation so not even in the same
ballpark and it's it just it's yeah I
mean they can just say that in the film
most people hear that nod their head
because they've heard those numbers
before but the devil is always in the
details well what's going on is what
what you see in a lot of these videos
where only one person gets to talk right
one person who has a specific agenda
gets to cherry-pick the data and distort
it and then put it on the filming and
you can accuse us of doing that right
now because both of us are clearly on
the same page yeah and I would be happy
to have James come in with you
afterwards yeah just but we decided it
with Joel yes
and we did well James is way more
reasonable than Joel and not slimy so
I'd be happy to do that and I think that
when when it's all said and done I I
would just like people to be informed
and your everyone is going to have their
own ideological bias everyone's going to
have their own preference everyone but
to make poorly informed decisions or
that's being kind to be more blunt
deceptive information forming your
decisions and and and having health
consequences because of that to me
pisses me off and freaks me out yeah
because it's it's not the health aspects
are not being represented accurately
yeah it particularly bothers me when
kids are involved oh it was another
there was a case recently where I was
gonna tweet it but I was like god damn I
can't even tweet it so sad where a child
had died from malnutrition yeah because
the parents were feeding in a vegan diet
and all the other kids look like they
were starving to death too and then the
you know social workers came in and
thought it's a goddamn nightmare and you
don't hear I mean if you hear about that
from people that are starving their kids
on a regular diet they're just either
extremely poor or they're monsters and
they're treating their kid terribly
these people don't seem like they're bad
people know that's recipe areas you
believe in what they're doing they're
trying to do the right thing that's the
scariest part about it is like you're
seeing that this does diet again you can
do it correctly but it's fucking
complicated it's hard yeah just one more
thing on the greenhouse gas questioned
all the numbers I just gave you were
from conventional methods
you know like basically CAFO beef when
they have looked at regenerative
holistically managed livestock they
found that it can either be carbon
neutral or even a carbon sink so there's
a guy who's written some papers on this
Richard Teague and in his 2018 paper
which again you can find on my website
the crusted CEO slash game-changers
he found that these larger more complex
holistically manage sites can sequester
between 3 to
four and even up to seven tons of carbon
per hectare per year
so these holistically managed beef
operations are actually removing carbon
from the outside an a chiral biogenic
cycle and the difference and this is
important to understand is the
difference between transportation which
is basically taking out fossil fuels
that have not been part of that natural
cycle for millions of years and then
just emitting them into the atmosphere
with the carbon the the biogenic carbon
cycle you have methane you know cows are
burping out methane methane goes up into
the atmosphere and then via hydroxyl
oxidation it's converted into co2 and
water vapor then the plants take in co2
and by and then by a photosynthesis they
convert it into food basically
and then the cows eat the food and the
whole cycle keeps going and this is this
is a natural cycle this is not something
you have to use equipment - the natural
cycle so it just has to be a certain
amount of plant life and in their area
and so the way that I mean like Joel
Salatin for example from Polyface farms
and and savory Institute they basically
educate farmers on how to rotate their
livestock again this is not my area of
expertise but rather than just having
the cattle stay in the same place the
whole time like in a feedlot they're
moving the cattle around the cattle are
pooping then they bring the chickens to
where that was you know where the cattle
were and they they move it around in a
way again that I don't fully understand
but the effect of this is that the
amount of carbon that is sequestered
from the atmosphere is greater than the
amount of co2 that is emitted and this
these life cycle analyses have been done
and published in the literature it's
true that right now that type of
holistically managed livestock is not
very common but that doesn't mean that
it's
what we should be doing and you know
this is the thing like with the film I
agree with the problem that they you
know the premise which is that the
feedlot beef production is a nightmare
you know if it can be bad for the
environment and we have to do something
about it where we disagree is what the
solution is yeah you know they go to a
plant-based diet or fake meat or lab
meat I go to regenerative holistically
managed livestock okay so this animal
product like the the regenerative
livestock production doing it in this
method is that sufficient to feed
everyone the production I mean how much
land do you need to do something like
this so I and you're gonna ask that
question and I talk to savory Institute
about this and a few other people and
basically one response is it's the only
way we're gonna feed everybody because
as I mentioned they're only 60 harvests
left because of soil degradation so
continually you know trying to scale up
industrial plant agriculture with soy
and corn and and all of these kinds of
crops is going to further degrade the
soil and at some point we're not gonna
have any soil F Texas doctor right we
should talk about this that you need
compost and you need fertilizer and you
need something that replenishes the soil
and doing these large-scale monoculture
crops when you have these enormous areas
they're just depleting right they're
just pulling and then they have to add
you can't add something for nothing
that's the thing we're not just we're
not choosing between like you know to
one really good alternative in one
terrible alternative that's not a choice
like never seen before if it show like
that's not even a choice you just do you
just obviously do the right thing we're
choosing
it's like on the one hand if we try to
scale up plant agriculture in an
environment where according to the FAO
our soils are in only quote fair poor or
very poor condition and we only have 60
harvests last left due to rapidly
deteriorating soil due to erosion and
nutrient depletion
then we desperately need new methods of
restoring healthy soil and if we can do
that with regenerative holistically
managed livestock which has been shown
you know in the scientific literature to
be possible then that may be the only
way we can feed everybody so we would
need to almost have a reversal if that
was the case and have more animal
agriculture than plant agriculture but
not the way it's being done now right it
would have a fee so they would have to
be like Joel Salatin setup yeah so we're
probably Facebook need three things to
happen one would be we'd need to return
all the crop lands that are being used
to feed livestock and feed Lots right
now to grassland and number two we need
to put all unused land like the rocky
hilly soil that are or land that can't
be used for plant agriculture into
production for with animals and number
three farmer farmers and ranchers would
need to adopt regenerative practices you
know so I'm not saying this is an
enormous undertaking
you're not we're talking but so is
feeding the world with plant based
agriculture but whichever direction we
go we're talking about saying you know
really systemic change that needs to
happen in a big way what percent that
this would have you'd have to have all
of the meat be grass-fed meat because
they would be eating what they naturally
eat now
what is the percentage of grass-fed meat
in this country currently I don't know
for sure I think the number I read was
something like two or three percent so
very low very small yeah yeah that makes
sense
many many people prefer grain-fed meat
they like it fatty and sloppy no I mean
that's what it is right a lot of people
like that remark well what's interesting
and I didn't even know this until a few
years ago even fact you know feedlot
meat is mostly grass-fed it's just what
happens in the last like five or ten
percent of the process so it's like 90
percent grass-fed and then it's grain
finished and that grain finishing gives
it the marbling that what you're talking
about what makes the I'm sick
I mean that's really they're not
supposed to eat that really that's what
it is and we've gotten addicted to
animals eating things they're not
supposed to eat and the way their flesh
comes out yeah I mean eighty a lot of
that is that you're eating things like
soy cakes you know they which is a
byproduct of soybean oil production
soybean oil consumption has grown like a
thousandfold in the past hundred and
twenty years it's now the the number one
edible oil that we eat because if you go
into the supermarket and you look at any
food label it's not soybean oil soybean
oil soybean oil so the oil is valuable
and then they take the cakes that are
left over from the oil production
process and feed them to cows and so
yeah they're eating stuff that they
wouldn't normally have eaten in that
scenario yeah so both scenarios as you
said are almost insane feeding everyone
and then also like what do we do with
the animals if we're gonna stop eating
meat like let's let's say if this entire
country stops eating me what do we do
with the animals we give them birth
control make a die of old age do they go
extinct if they don't go upstate who
houses them who feeds them what do we do
with them we never eat them how do we
kill all the wild pigs I mean another
question is what do we do with the feed
the things that we're feeding the
animals if that stuff you composes it
releases carbon into the atmosphere as
well but at least when you feed it to
animals you're taking food that is
inedible to humans like I'm not gonna
eat soy cakes and I think you are grass
fobs corn stalks leftover grains after
which you make whiskey and other types
of alcohol you feed those to cattle they
upcycle that into highly nutrient dense
and bioavailable protein what James said
the number of times in the film was
cattle or animals are just the middleman
I'm like exactly they're really amazing
middlemen they take food that is
inedible to humans and turn it into
super nutrient-dense food that we can
that we can digest and absorb I mean
thank you yeah this I mean it's just
it's so confusing when a film like this
gets made because so many people get up
in arms and so many people get
influenced by it and so many people
think that this is the way to go my take
on a lot of this is there's a lot of
people that have kind of fashioned their
careers
out of this ideology whether they
believe it or not you know the thing is
like we can go down that road of said we
could say okay so this film was made by
James you know James Cameron was one of
the filmmakers he also is the owner of
verdiant foods which is a pea protein
company and he said it he has the goal
of becoming the biggest organic pea
protein company and in the world he's
invested 140 million dollars into it his
wife Suzy Cameron is finding a chain of
vegan schools and so you know from one
perspective that's conflict of interest
you know this it this is an agenda
driven film it's not a dispassionate
objective look you know scientific look
at the vegan diet but you know I mean
you can make that argument about just
about anyone at this point like is it
that surprising that a vegan film has a
bunch of vegan medical experts in it is
it surprising that those experts invest
in what they believe in and that they
write books about it I don't think so
you know but but it's important to know
that and to not confuse a film like that
with a scientific work yes that's my
problem with this is the what is it the
american college of lifestyle medicine i
have to look this up one of these
organizations is offering CEUs to
doctors who watch this film and complete
a quiz that's absolutely ridiculous this
has not been pure this is not
peer-reviewed science this is not
something that doctors should be getting
CEUs for what does he you continuing
education units so like basically
doctors have to do any medical
professional has to do a certain amount
of continuing education you know
generally you go to like an accredited
seminar or class or whatever and and
that's how you do it but they're
actually offering those for people who
doctors who watch this film and complete
a short quiz and yeah that's freaky so I
don't know if we talked about this on
the contour and one of the previous one
yeah I was American College of lifestyle
medicine well they were founded by
seventh-day adventists at Loma Linda
University the seventh-day Adventist
Church do you know about this or
vegetarian yeah so it was
one of the founders was Ellen White and
she taught that meat was a toxic
substance and that flesh should be
avoided because it increases our carnal
urges it was a moral religious thing and
first and then one of the other an early
Adventist church member Lenna Cooper she
co-founded the American Dietetic
Association which is still to this day
one of our major Dietetics organizations
and she wrote textbooks that were used
in Dietetic and nursing programs all
around the world for four thirty years
so we have this weird meshing that goes
back to like the early 20th century
between religion and science - the
seventh-day Adventists have better
health overall in general they do
they've like one of those bhaijaan
people but the argument is often made
that that's related to diet well it
could be that it's it's related to you
know part of their Creed is to eat
healthy Whole Foods but they're also
don't smoke they don't drink they're
they're advised to exercise so it's kind
of like the dean ornish studies where
you know you put together all these
interventions that one of which is low
fat diet and then you say that the
benefit was because of the low fat diet
but you've what you're referring to is
the study that showed that I mean this
is what vegans like to say that vegan
diet is the Enjoli loves to use this one
a vegan diet is the only diet that's
ever been shown in a study to remove
disease yeah but what this study
actually shows is these people had
terrible diets they smoked and they
drank and then they put him on a vegan
diet no smoking no drinking and exercise
and what do you know their health
improved but it's not like we have a
corresponding diet where they did the
exact same thing and gave them an
omnivorous diet with like grass fed
bison meat no and then showed a similar
set of tests and showed a decline or
showed a better performance by the vegan
diet you have all of these factors that
are compiled together quitting drinking
quitting smoking quit eating shit food
eating a vegan diet and exercise
Jannetty support all
which we know have an impact on heart
disease that is the study so when they
say that a vegan diet is the only diet
that's ever been shown to clinically
reduce heart disease that's not really
true disingenuous and the other thing
about that study is that in the the
baseline characteristics of the control
group versus the experimental group were
totally different the experimental group
weighed 34 pounds more than the control
group
so they had more you know they were more
overweight more they had more weight to
lose I know and we're less healthy I
mean that study would be thrown out
today like you can't study what you
study this was 1998 yeah well this was
the problem when conversing with Joel
about this and by the way the reason why
I had him on I know people think I'm
biased and I am eyed I'm biased this is
this my perspective is that you're
correct and that all these other you
know Mark Sisson and Rob Wolfe and all
these other folks I think they're
correct an omnivorous die as a way to go
but I had him on to try to pursue this
path of objectivity to try to give him
an opportunity to express what what's
incorrect about what you're saying and
it didn't work out for him in I mean by
everybody's account that I saw that he
lost that debate so you I mean you you
brought up a point which I think is the
crux of this whole thing which is
context is everything and the problem
with a lot of the research on
plant-based diets and you know low-fat
diets and all this is they make the
implicit assumption that a diet that
includes meat that is like where the
context is KFC McDonald's you know
cheese doodles coca-cola all the whole
standard American diet is the same as a
diet that includes meat that's
completely whole foods based you know
like the way you eat yeah way I know
lots of vegetables fresh you know nuts
seeds starchy tubers whatever obvious if
you ask a hundred people on the street
my guess is a hundred percent would say
those are obviously different yes but
the way that research treats them is
there's a same-same factor the main
factors meat yeah that's you only
control for any of those other things
ridiculous
that's changing so there have been
studies have been done over the past few
years that are looking more at diet
quality rather than just the quantity of
specific food ingredients or foods like
meat and what those diet those studies
are universally saying is that quality
is what makes a difference yes and so a
great example we talked about this with
Joel are the studies on looking at
omnivorous versus vegetarian and vegan
diets and life span but instead of just
looking at the general population that
eats meat they tried to find ways to
like at least choose a slightly
healthier omnivorous population so there
was one the health food shoppers study
where they they only looked at people
who shopped at health food stores
thinking ok these people are at least
thinking about it a little bit you know
it's it's still not controlling for all
the factors but they're saying let's
look at people who shop at a place like
Whole Foods and then let's look at the
like compare life span between
vegetarians and vegans and omnivores
well guess what they both both groups
live a lot longer than the general
population but there was no difference
in lifespan between people who ate meat
and vegetarians and vegans the the
premises that meat is poison and so when
you add meat to these these studies that
people with meat are good while they're
eating poison and the people without me
look no poison I mean this is but what
about all the other shit yeah this is
what's so crazy about it like how can
you have a study where you don't take
into account how many people drink or
smoke yeah and you just had the meat
it's it's insanity it's that's the
healthy user bias and yeah this is the
the problem and what makes my job so
difficult is like people have heard that
mean is bad for 50 what 60 years you
know so someone can say meat is bad
that's three words and for me to unpack
that I have to talk about healthy user
bias I have to talk about problems with
data collection and food frequency
questionnaire ease I have to talk about
relative versus absolute risk you know I
mean people are just like well that's a
problem with any of this data it's one
of the beautiful things about being able
to talk about it on a podcast with a
moron like me is at least you're getting
a conversation where people gonna ask
questions like what the fuck is he
saying so I get to ask you that and then
people get to hear it
it's you know this is a very strange
time when it comes to information
because so much of it is available but
almost too much and then when you
realize when you start trying to study
nutrition there is so much to learn
there's so many factors and there's so
many biases like I listened to your
interview with Matt Taibbi and you know
the point I was thinking about it
because you were talking about it
politically how we're just living in
echo chambers now
yeah so you go on social media you're
Republican you're only gonna see stuff
about that that caters to your view and
the algorithms are even optimized for
that because they know that you'll click
on that more and that will lead to more
ad dollars yes so but it's similar with
nutrition so you know if you're vegan
you go on YouTube you're gonna see ton
of vegan videos and vegan perspective
same with your Facebook feed etc and to
be fair it's the same for you know
people who are into keto or low carb or
carnivore or whatever they're into it's
it's the same thing yeah you're just
getting this reinforcing confirmation
bias you know supporting access to
information that is a weird thing about
social media algorithms whether it's
YouTube algorithms or Facebook or any of
these things is that they're giving you
what you want to see which you would say
oh great well that's what I want to see
yeah but the problem is like there's
there's so there's so many counter
arguments especially when you're talking
about nutrition science there's so many
discussions on both sides of the fence
and it seems like both sides are
preaching to the choir yeah well you
know I mean we're biased as you said my
story is a lot of people knows I was
vegan and and somebody said videos use
are the most vegan sounding non vegan
ever well I mean yeah I was a vegan I
was vegetarian I was raw food vegan I
was macrobiotic vegan and I have a lot
of friends who were vegan I patients
that are vegan I have nothing against
vegans and I totally get the reasons
that people become vegan but I like many
others and my patients in my community
my health was harmed by that and and now
I mean how was your health arm can you
explain to people
yeah I mean I I lost weight and as you
can see I don't have a lot to lose to
begin with my digestion got really
screwed up I got depressed I'd never
been depressed like I've never been in a
person who gets depressed I felt anxious
I you know it just was clearly not
working for me and again I that's not to
say it can't work for some people do you
think the cause of depression had
something to do with the diet because of
the lack of cholesterol it's it's 12
hormones and yeah for sure but you know
now like I mean it's funny to some I
don't actually I make a point of not
reading comments usually yeah but
occasionally I come across them on
Twitter this is something a comedian
told me so so you know people are like
oh he's such a you know he's gonna get
it on there and just low carb low carb
that's told like I don't I'm not a low
carb guy and never have been I in fact
I'm in trouble with the low carb
community because you know I I push back
I don't think it's right for everybody I
don't think it's right for performance
yeah I don't see any evidence that for
it elite athletic performers that it's
the way to go and I don't know anyone
that's an elite athletic performer that
follows those diets maybe endurance
endurance Zack and Zack flies in the
face of all this stuff and you know if
you want to include someone like that
guy that ran the Appalachian Trail and
48 days whatever he did yeah I mean
which is no small feat for sure but I
mean Zack bitter ran 24 he ran a
100-mile race in 11 hours and 40 minutes
which is 40 something that which is
fucking banana running and I think after
that and he's a savage all he eats rib
eyes yeah that's what that guy is so the
main you need to talk about the main
food in his diet is ribeye steaks he's
mostly keto so yeah I mean anyways my
point was just like I'm try try I'm not
super dogmatic I'm just like I'm
interested in what works for the most
people essentially and you know as you
mentioned Scott Jurek a Belgian dentist
shattered his record by five days
a couple years ago and that guy was
eating my Snickers um tons of crap so
I'm I'm not saying that the batteries
record by five days yeah oh Jesus I'm
not saying that I'm not saying that's
what you should do but I'm saying
there's more to athletic performance
than food I guess that's not really
deceptive because he did break the
record when he broke it he did break it
he broke it again and then like Michael
Phelps you know guys pizza guy eats
12,000 calories of like sugar swiss
french toast
pizza same bolt in the beijing link
olympics when he shattered those records
he faint he ate a thousand over a
thousand chicken nuggets I think
somebody calculated so I know there's
more there's more to it when you're at
that level of performance
you're burning off such an insane amount
of calories you're working so hard you
can kind of almost eat anything when
you're when you're in that mode yes yeah
when we do this is obviously not
comparable when we did sober October
last year we had this fitness challenge
I was doing cardio no no joke it minimum
five hours a day sometimes six and seven
it was insane and I was eating
everything boxes of cookies got bottles
of soda
I lost weight too yeah I did well not
really because I lifted a lot of weights
too yeah I kind of maintain maybe I lost
a couple pounds but I was drinking like
giant like cokes like I like I was
drinking like a cream soda I never drink
that shit yeah but it's like my body
wanted sugar it's like give me some
sugar you just did seven hours on a
fucking elliptical machine right asshole
it was so ridiculous but those guys are
working out even harder than that so
imagine like what felt if you need
12,000 calories you're not getting it
with paleo and you're not getting it
with vegan diet that's important though
let's go let's rewind a little bit to
protein the RDA that's super important
yeah so 0.8 kilograms per grams per
kilogram of protein per day is the RDA
and again that's just the basic minimum
that's not the amount that's needed for
optimal health and performance that's
just the absolute basics for a lot of
for avoiding malnutrition however even
that number now that's based on outdated
nitrogen balance studies
for determining the RDA and there's a
newer method called the indicator amino
acid oxidation technique or IAA oh and
this suggests that the RDA should be 1.2
grams per kilogram and again just the
basic minimum bare minimum not optimal
so it's now gone up from zero point
eight to one point two and if you use
that number if you pull up slide eight
Jamie that's only enough for an adult
that weighs less than 130 pounds really
so the sorry that you know how he said
and James said in the study the average
vegetarian gets 71 grams a day which is
not only you know the RDA but 70 percent
more that's using the zero point eight
number but if you use one point two
grams per kilogram per day then a lot of
people are going to be protein deficient
on a vegetarian diet and we're not again
not talking about optimal amount for
athletes we're just talking about the
RDA basic bare minimum and when you say
vegetarian you should say vegan crap
because you're not talking about egg
protein you can get no this study was
vegetarian they weren't referring to
vegans so you actually could get egg
protein and dairy
right protein eggs are a far superior in
terms of their amino acids well than
vegetables yeah so for vegans it would
be different friend of mine I was saying
this really recently why don't you try
eggs and they look to me like I was
talking them about poison yeah like
people there's plenty of people that are
vegan or vegetarian and you bring up
eggs to them they look you like why
would I eat an egg yeah so so that's you
know one point two is the RDA with if
you use this newer method but for
athletes it James to his credit does
acknowledge in the film that athletes
need more protein than than regular non
athlete people but he doesn't say how
much more so again if you use these IAO
method they've done the use this newer
technique to look at athletes and they
found that the range is somewhere
between 1.4 to 2.7 grams per kilogram so
we're now way higher than that 0.8
number
and just for people who aren't familiar
with kilograms let's say we take the
median number they're 2.1 grams per
kilogram per day well anyone who's ever
been in the bodybuilding weightlifting
community will recognize this that's one
pound of protein per pound of body
weight a day
yes which has been the common
recommendation in that community for one
gram of probes re one gram one gram and
in fact even Arnold in the movie says I
weighed 250 pounds I used to eat 250
grams of protein you know like that's
that's that it turns out that's actually
based on science you know so a 200 pound
athlete we need 200 grams of protein a
day and Jamie if you pull up slide 10
this is what you'd have to eat on a
vegan diet to get that amount of protein
and again we're just talking about
quantity we're not talking about down
athlete that's me 3 3 cups of cooked
lentils 3 cups of chickpeas 2 cups of
quinoa 3 ounces of almonds 3 slices of
silken tofu and 10 tablespoons of peanut
butter that's the whole day that's the
day I could fuck that up in a day yeah
you could but the problem is the deer
score for all of those like the
bioavailability and the amino acid
profile would be horrible compared to
meat eggs dairy so what would I have to
do cuz then I know they've done this
studying there was a study that I'd read
or had heard about I should say where
they compared rice protein to whey
protein and they found that at a certain
level of grams like whatever it was they
had an equal effect is it lutein leucine
leucine the muscle protein synthesis
yeah they had an equal effect I should
give credit to the video that I was
watching some gentleman I was watching
this video today dr. Ryan Lowry and that
they were saying that what that means is
that correct me if I'm wrong what it is
is when you get it once you hit a
certain level of leucine it's a point of
diminishing returns and there's no
there's no added
benefit to having more leucine in your
diet so if you hit whatever it is I
think it's 48 grams or something that if
when you have 48 grams of this and 48
grams of that you put the two of them
together it's essentially the same this
the same effect well I'm not sure about
that but I mean leucine is very
important for anabolic signaling and
muscle protein synthesis it's it's one
of the essential it's the essential
amino acid that's thought to be the most
important for that and it's it's low in
plant proteins and the other issue with
plant proteins that you have is that
they have limiting amino acids so these
are amino acids that actually interfere
with muscle protein synthesis so because
the levels are so low in that food so
lysine is a limiting amino acid and
grains like wheat and rice maybe that's
there was leucine and lysine discussion
may be there may be and then methionine
and cysteine are limiting in legumes
like soy so Jaime at slide six I made a
chart comparing the amino acid profile
on beef to several different plant
proteins like white beans soy beans peas
and rice what you can see there is beef
is higher in every single amino acid
other than then every plant protein
that's compared there with the exception
of soybeans are slightly higher in
tryptophan than beef
look at leucine so beef it's two point
two three versus zero point five eight
for white beans one point three for soy
soy is higher and leucine than any other
plant protein which is why it's often
used and then like zero point three four
peas and 0.01 for rice if you get to a
certain number or a certain level of all
these so if you eat enough food that you
would pass a certain marker would would
it be possible to have the same effect
by eating cooked peas or soybeans it is
possible or sure so I an enormous amount
of that as you can see because of the
levels and this is why a lot of vegan
bodybuilders and athletes end up using
protein powders because you can get to
the
amounts easier by using the powders and
you can also blend like a you know 70% P
with 30% rice to get the right amino
acid ratio easier with powders so like
Patrick Babu Mian is a good example of
that you know did you see the video that
Bobby got Geist made no of his oh so
there's actually videos that the one
that you sent me yes I did see there's
video that Patrick made himself of his
own diet yes on you know what he eats on
a daily basis and it turns out to be a
boatload of protein powder and just
shakes with all kinds of powders and
supplements and things like that yeah so
yeah we can go through it so he starts
with a bunch of different supplements in
the morning multivitamin nutritional
yeast seeing glucosamine magnesium
calcium b12 and iron then he has a
protein shake with soy protein powder
creatine and beta-alanine which probably
is because he's aware of the research
showing lower levels of muscle creatine
and carnosine and in vegans beta alanine
and creatine would address that then he
has a post-workout smoothie with soy or
P protein powder glutamine beta alanine
creatine and dried greens and then his
first solid meal of the day is fried
falafel french fries soy sausage fried
peppers and tomatoes and then he has
some more protein shakes and smoothies
throughout the day so I don't know that
doesn't strike me as a super healthy way
to eat what what do you what problem do
you have that well first of all I think
we should primarily get nutrients from
food whenever we can I'm not against
supplementation I think there's a role
for it of course like you know
especially with things like vitamin D
that you might not be able to get enough
of from food or therapeutic
supplementation if you're dealing with a
health problem but like getting them
like eating a diet that is not
sufficient in the amount of nutrients
that you need and then using supplements
to make up you know to to address that
doesn't make a lot of sense to me well
in his situation he's got a very unique
situation that he's a he's a strength
athlete that's all he's doing is trying
to lift really really heavy things so he
needs to maintain
a certain amount of bulk yes I have an
enormous amount of protein yeah a normal
protein has to be he's very heavy you
know and that that sport is also that's
a steroid sport I mean it's just one of
those sports where it's like
bodybuilding much everybody steroid
sport so you're eating massive amounts
of quantities you're taking chemicals
yeah it might not be the healthiest
thing but it's also like just the sport
itself might not be the healthiest thing
I mean you've seen them carry people on
the yo he was doing that in the gym yeah
that's not good for your back but it
works for what he's trying to do nicely
it's working for what he's trying it
does there's no dispute in that see what
he's doing is almost like the
intelligent way if you want to be vegan
and do what he's trying to do right I
don't know if he could eat just
vegetables and pull that off you
couldn't but that's kind of the point
there are a lot of other strong men that
do just like Robert Oberst you had on
the show John's meat and rice right yeah
its pounds of beef and rice simple you
know accessible form of carbohydrate and
a lot of protein and it's an unfair
comparison and Oberst talked about him
on the podcast before there much law
he's much larger a lot of the strongmen
not huge like the guy who played Gregor
and Patrick is not these are not nearly
that time five six or five seven things
so the comparison between him and a guy
like Oberst in those legit top of the
food chain strongest man in the world
competitions it's not it's not a
completely different weight class he's
you know Robert is enormous he's so much
bigger but the problem is in the film
they don't make that distinction and
they try to pretend that this guy is one
of the strongest men in the world he's
not he's very strong no doubt and he
definitely has broken some records in
some competitions and you know and you
have different weight classes and
different but you're not talking about a
guy who wins those you know Magnus von
Magnus and fucking competitions where
they're carrying trucks and shit well I
mean
my point to was like is it the best
example of how an athlete can thrive on
a plant-based Whole Foods diet I think
it is though because for him
for his size you know for it to be a guy
who's five foot seven and is carrying
that fucking enormous amount of weight
he's obviously doing something that's
very impressive and he's doing it while
he's on this vegan diet and again I mean
just discounting all the illegal
supplementation because I don't think it
is illegal in that sport it's kind you
kind of have to do it would you want to
get that big the but if you want to do
it and do it as a vegan he is showing
you that it's possible so in that sense
I defend what he's doing because I think
that he like that's the only way in that
but this is a very sports specific area
of performance he's just talking about
lifting insanely heavy shit and he's
doing that and thriving on a vegan diet
yeah no doubt
you know enormous Lee strong and he's
succeeding I would argue that he might
do even better if he was eating meat you
know nutrient-dense nutrition a suit and
he might need to take fewer supplements
and drink less powder yeah but I think
that's my bias I'm more like a Whole
Foods person and you know that's where
I'm coming from another problem that I
had in the film especially in relations
to sport is the Nate Diaz Conor McGregor
comparison yeah first of all Nate Diaz
is not a vegan Nate Diaz eats fish and
he eats eggs yeah and he he does try to
follow a whole food vegan diet I think
during camp so I would have to talk to
him about that I know he's done
interviews talking about that but I've
definitely seen him eat fish I watched
him on the Anthony Bourdain's television
show and he was eating fish I know he's
eating eggs he doesn't eat land animals
I think what he does is avoids red meat
well fish and eggs take care of it yeah
you know fish is actually higher often
and than meat in terms of protein counts
per ounce it's also very high in
collagen which is super important for
recovery and repair and explains lack of
collagen probably explains why a lot of
vegan athletes get injured which we can
talk about more later and then eggs as
you know are super you know they're
really high on the Dia's score scale
bio-available lots of other nutrients so
here's another problem with that whole
comparison first of all Nate Diaz is a
fantastic fighter he's a long time
mixed martial arts veteran he's
outstanding in all areas he has a
fantastic submission game his brother
Nick Diaz one of the best in the world
he's also outstanding and all and his
brother Nick I believe is vegan he's
probably a better example cuz you know I
mean even though Nick hasn't beaten like
some of the top-flight fighters in a few
years back when he was in Strikeforce he
was top of the food chain he's he's an
elite fighter for sure I'm not sure if
he was vegan back then I'd have to ask
him but the point being that nate is a
exceptional exceptionally skilled
athlete and he was coming into that
fight on extremely short notice so he
was most likely following his off camp
diet which is eggs and eatin fish and
things along those lines partying in
Mexico so who knows what the fuck he was
doing it was like 11 days out they call
him and they set up this fight I forget
how many days out it was but it was a
very very short amount of time Conor was
preparing for a 155-pound fight against
ha failed dos Anjos so he was reducing
his caloric intake dropping his weight
down to try to make this hundred fifty
five pound weight class it's a big cut
for him so when when you do that you you
are in anticipation that the person
you're fighting is also doing that so
you both kind of agree that you're going
to be in a certain weakened state when
you actually weigh in at 155 pounds it
was like two weight classes below his
normal let me go make it keep going
so he's this is that was the first and
only time that well except that rematch
with Nate was the only time that he's
fought at 170 so they made a decision to
fight at 170 instead of 155 because Nate
did not have time to reduce his calories
and cut the weight and it takes a long
time it's a slow process of neza big
fella he walks around probably over 200
pounds easy and he drops weight and he
didn't want to drop that much weight
he's a big guy man he's big and long and
Conor was dropping his weight down to
155 so he's 10 days out and he just
starts packing on food eating as much
food as he can not only that but
stylistically Nate's
nightmare for him Nate has a fucking
evil submission game he's tough as nails
his endurance is always fantastic
because offseason he's always doing
triathlons and he's always doing like
endurance sports I mean he's in
phenomenal shape and his jujitsu is like
many levels better than Connors I mean
he's a legit top of the food chain mmm a
black belt in jujitsu so they have this
fight
Connor gets tired Nate beats him up gets
him on the ground submits them and
they're saying this is a victory for
veganism what they don't say is five
months later they fought and Connor beat
him they fought again they fought they
this time they had a full training camp
Connor prepared and it was a very close
fight I should say you could have vote
you could have scored it either way I
mean it's it was a really close fight
razor's thin but the fact remains Conor
beat him in the rematch so I'm going to
leave this out of the narrative like oh
my god the vegans are dominating look
vegan dominated but he's you know this
is a last minute fight Connor goes up
and wait Nate Diaz
you know steps in and and takes care of
business and wins the fight it speaks
more to how good Nate Diaz is than a
vegan diet right and it doesn't take
into account that four months later or
five months later whatever it was he
loses and he's not vegan I mean there's
there fuels it's sometimes there are a
few other examples like that in the film
there where you catch like a certain
window of it but they don't show what
happens afterwards we talked about the
vegan honeymoon so Brian Jennings the
boxer yes they talked about he went
vegan in end of 30 2013 he was 17 I know
before he was vegan and he's been so
he's seven and four after that so you
can't say that that's because he
transitioned to a vegan diet but you
can't also say nork nor can you say that
veganism improved his performance right
I mean it objectively he's gotten worse
since then well the argument against
that would be that he's moving up into
the upper echelons of the heavyweight
division and it's filled with killers
like any combat sport and that as he got
in many fighters don't make it to get in
and he lost to wasn't one of the
Klitschkos yes I think he lost to
Vladimir I think he lost a Vladimir
Klitschko and a decision and he
handled himself very well it was a very
good fight for him he look real good but
yeah I mean that that upper alone you
get to this Andy Ruiz Deontay Wilder I
mean killers yeah it's like not most
people that get up into that division
they start losing HP here's a good
example too of this principle of context
being everything because he said in the
film my early years growing up in Philly
the only thing we knew was spinach and a
can collard greens and Popeyes KFC
everybody frying chicken I grew up not
even knowing about half these other
vegetables asparagus to me just came out
like five years ago right so you know
again early honeymoon yeah going from
going from like a crappy standard
American diet to a Whole Foods diet I
don't doubt that someone's gonna feel
better but what do you felt better like
you said eating some grass fed bison and
some along with all of those plans yeah
that's the question yes that is the
question and the this this is the real
purpose my real purpose for getting
involved in these fucking discussions
over and over and over again people to
understand that this there's nuance to
this yeah there's and there's also
biological variability there's some
people that are they can get along on
certain diets easier there's some people
that have a horrible time with seafood
there's some people that have a horrible
time with certain grains I mean this is
we are all different we come from an
enormous planet where your ancestors
developed and your genes developed in
different parts of the world we're all
different but but what we know about
nutrition it is so important that we are
honest about what we know this is what
the problem I have with a lot of these
documentaries they're not honest about
what they know they're only giving you
little snippets and cherry-picking data
and doing things like the study that
showed that the vegan diet can
clinically reverse heart disease
these are you're using all this
deception pretending that the the
gladiators chose to eat gruel like this
is how we're gonna kick ass we're just
gonna eat barley the fuck out of here
this is nonsense and they know it's
nonsense
either they know it's nonsense or they
just fucking slap some blinders on their
head and just plow straight ahead and
ignore
anything that conflicts with any of
these thoughts of Derrick's buttocks
person I mean there's there's so many
examples of this in the film one was
this lettuce has more antioxidants than
salmon are eggs well so what I mean
we're not we're not saying don't eat
lettuce right I mean I've
I'm always I've always argued that the
optimal diet includes both plants and
food and there's reasons for that plants
contain some nutrients that animal foods
don't and animal foods can trans that
plants don't an orange has more vitamin
C than a beef steak right that's just
how it goes so we could just as easily
say a serving of salmon has 716 times
more selenium there's lettuce and
provides a hundred percent of the RDA of
b12 where let us provide 0% but I'm not
gonna say that because that's ridiculous
I'm not trying to get people to eat
lettuce No so you're not on Team well
that and there's another thing that's
going on right now these carnivore folks
which I find fascinating because they
are as ideologically driven as vegans we
have the anti vegans it's like we have
an Tifa and then we have the alright now
we have the carnivores and we have the
vegans and both of them dig their
fucking heels in the sand and both of
them are committed to thinking that
their side is the only way to go and
rhonda patrick has talked about this
many many times when people start
discussing negative aspects of eating
food particularly plants because of
stressors and she's like no there's
actually an effect where your body's
reacting to them that's beneficial much
like when you get in a sauna your body
reacts to the heat it's actually
beneficial for your health hormesis yes
and just like that's how exercise works
yes you lift weight until you can't lift
it anymore your muscle tissue breaks
down and it rebuilds next time so these
folks that are talking about don't eat
vegetables because vegetables give you
these things that are bad for your body
like okay yeah are you sure I mean
there's a lot of work to be done here
folks there's a lot of fucking research
to be read into and there's a lot of
conversations you have to have with
people far more educated than you and
I think often as humans we have a hard
time differentiating between like our
own experience and what you know works
for us and then yes larger bigger
picture so take someone who has a severe
autoimmune disease they go on carnivore
their symptoms disappear
yes that's pretty compelling you know
it's really understandable why they
would be like passionate about that and
why they would want to continue that
approach but again like I said before
we're not always choosing between one
great alternative and one terrible
alternative it is interesting to me
though that one thing that we have been
lied to about is that you need
vegetables because these you don't need
it just much like you know with RDA you
need a certain amount to not starve to
death you don't necessarily need
vegetables there's a whole community of
people out there that's thriving and not
eating a single piece of vegetable yeah
it's really interesting the the problem
is we just don't know what happens long
term there so I got my eye on Shaun
Baker
I'm not saying and look I want to be
clear it might be fine
it seems like it is I don't know I'm
just saying we don't know so you're
you're introducing an element of
uncertainty because whether you look at
it from an if you look at it from an
anthropological perspective every group
of people we've ever studied in human
history has eaten both plants and
animals in different proportions what
about the Comanches one of the things I
was reading about the Comanches was I
watching listening rather to this audio
book summer moon empire of the summer
moon it's amazing I recommended it too
much I'm gonna shut the fuck up about it
but one of the things they talk about is
the Comanches ate very little berries or
fruits or vegetables they mostly just
ate Buffalo the Inuit also ate very
little especially during the winter you
know but they went to great lengths to
trade for plant foods and in the summer
the more plant food so that the
proportions vary you know the Maasai for
example yes milk meat blood and yeah
some plant foods but then you have other
groups to date more plant foods you know
the there was a study ethnographic study
of hunter-gatherer cultures done 230
roughly study cultures study and they
found that on average the
hunter-gatherers got about
percent of their calories from animal
foods and about 30% from plant foods so
so--that's percent of calories that's
not looking at a plate because animal
foods are more calorie dense so it still
might be two thirds of the plate as
plants and one third is animal foods if
they use plates but that's the rough
percentage and it but it would vary you
know from from place to place we don't
know of any group that exclusively and
by choice not from living in a marginal
environment like the Arctic but by
choice ate only animal foods for a long
period of time and a lot of the research
that we have the clinical research
suggests that plants have some useful
nutrients especially some fibers that
can feed the beneficial gut bacteria
there are studies showing that extremely
low carb diets can have some maybe not
great effects on the gut flora so again
it could be fine
but we just don't know and so there's
you're adding an element of uncertainty
there that's all I'm saying
so there could be a carnivore honeymoon
as it were just like you're talking
about the vegan honeymoon yeah and that
there could so your contention and this
is my belief as well is that most human
beings fare better on an omnivorous diet
with both plants and animals yes and
what proportion of plants and animal
foods will depend on all the factors
that you mentioned genes epigenetics
health status geography
rhino what whatever else is going on but
you know and for some what some people
that might just be a small amount
available might be Nate Diaz you know
have some fish and some eggs and then
the rest you know plant-based diet for
other people it might be a lot more
animal foods that's where I think that
in individual variation comes in right
and I'm sure most of these athletes that
are following a vegan diet like you were
talking about earlier with Patrick
they're taking protein powders so
they're allowing themselves to get a
large dose of protein fulfill their
requirements simply and easily in a
shake form rather than having to wolf
down you know four or five bowls of some
and if they're not they they're probably
not doing that well so we have like all
these stories of NFL and NBA athletes
that went vegan and then stopped because
they were not able to maintain their
weight
got injured and he unable to recover in
the show notes for this I have like many
many examples of pretty high level NBA
and NFL just read I have Cam Newton is
one Cam Newton is the most recent one so
he went vegan in February he had the
worst season of his career yeah - two
yards on five carries in the first two
games and he rushed for more than 30
yards 33 yards game only once in his
last nine yes how Cam Newton's vegan
diet may be hurting Panthers quarterback
play in injury recovery what is this on
the website is this his notes oh it's
your notes but it's from a well it's
from a website yeah there's a references
it's and then he developed a Liz Frank
injury in his foot that's a broken foot
broken foot and really hard to recover
from some people think you know
certainly could be career-ending I mean
if you lose 10 20 pounds that's a big
deal for a high level athlete because
the studies have shown that that can
interfere with muscle protein synthesis
it can also increase inflammation and
make recovery more difficult so but the
other thing is if they're not eating the
protein powders are not taking collagen
for example of a vegan source of
collagen collagen is critical for muscle
recovery and repair and it's hard to you
know you can make some collagen but I
think a lot of people on a plant-based
diet if they're high level athletes and
they're not really getting collagen
coming in it's going to be difficult
when Travis Barker was in a plane crash
he was like severely burned and they
were having a hard time getting him to
heal and he started eating meat in order
to heal because he's a vegan yeah I mean
he owns some what's it called crossroads
in a really amazing vegan restaurant in
in LA yeah he's talked about on the
podcast he was just wolfing down beef
jerky just you know trying to eat meat
to in order to get his body to heal that
couldn't have gone over well with the
vegan well I mean he was just being
honest I mean Travis Travis is super
super honest he's just saying like but
he chooses to not eat meat other than
that he just did it to recover and then
once he recovered he went back to his
normal vegan diet so you have Djokovic
who's best tennis player
time probably he when he first went
dairy-free and gluten-free he he would
you know was number one in the world he
went vegan ranking dropped 22 which is
the lowest he'd been since he was a
teenager and then he started adding fish
back into his diet and you know back
back up to number one
you have damian lillard from mba he went
vegan for five months but then he added
animal protein back that's slide 35
Jaime he said I did it but I started to
lose a little bit too much weight with
all the games and practices and all that
I had to balance it out so now I've been
mixing it up a little more having vegan
meals and still mixing it up with other
stuff so it sounds kind of similar to
Nate you know mostly vegan but adding
some animal foods back in there you had
Tony Tony Gonzalez Hall of Fame tight
end I went vegan and three weeks later
he said there was an article about this
said it's in the show notes the 100
pound dumbbells you used to easily throw
around felt like lead weights the
article says I was scared out of my mind
Gonzalez said he had lost 10 pounds he
ended up adding a small small amounts of
animal protein back to his diet
you got Gerald McCoy NFL he said quote
the explosiveness wasn't sustainable
because I didn't have that extra oomph
that I needed because the lack of the
type of protein I was taking in so I
just added a little bit of animal
protein back in my diet and it's given
me that move back now again we're
talking about elite athletes with very
specific nutritional requirements
because they're asking a tremendous
amount of their baggage I mean these
guys kids totally need like 4,000 to
5,000 calories a day to function well
and of that you know if they weigh 250
or 275 they need 250 to 275 grams of
protein and that should be high in
leucine for muscle protein synthesis and
it should be bioavailable you know all
that I mean so in comparison to the
average person the average person who
followed their diet probably wouldn't
see any detrimental effect for a long
time because they're not requiring their
body to do these incredible things I
don't know it varies I mean I've had
patients who went vegan and within two
say we're in really dire straits and
I've had and there are people who go
vegan and they're fine for their whole
life
so hormones are a big one right and why
is that everything you know
micronutrients really run the show I
mean of course the macronutrients
protein fat carbohydrates are important
and as I said before you know if you
were 100 and if you're 200 pounds the
average American weight is male is 200
pounds and so if they're in a vegetarian
they're consuming the average number of
grams of protein that's less than the
updated RDA we looked at that on that
slide so I would argue that even for the
average person protein could be a
problem both quantity and quality most
people are getting planning of
carbohydrates and enough fat so that's
not an issue then it comes down to
micronutrients so think b12 you know
that's the thing that came up in the
film a number of times so we should talk
about that a little bit because there
was some actually just you know
factually inaccurate information about
b12 and I want to correct
so the claim this is slide 55 Jamie
James said b12 is not made by animals
it's made by bacteria that these animals
consume in the soil and water before
industrial farming farm animals and
humans can get b12 by eating traces of
dirt on plant foods or by drinking water
from rivers or streams but now because
it pesticides and antibiotics and
chlorine killed bacteria this vitamin
even yeah that produces a vitamin even
farm animals have to be given b12
supplements that's just all false that's
all just factually wrong so first of all
b12 is made by bacteria but it's animals
don't get it from consuming soil and
water the the b12 is made by bacteria in
their gut so in ruminants like cows the
in the rumen which is a chamber in the
stomach the bacteria convert cobalt that
they get from grass that they eat into
cobalamin which is b12 and then they are
for gut fermenters so they can absorb
the b12 they've the bacteria produce in
their intestines and utilize that
themselves so
primates including humans also have
bacteria that make b12 but we're hindgut
fermenters so we cannot absorb the b12
that our own gut bacteria make well
that's not exactly true chimps and
gorillas can but that's only because
they eat their own poo so that is one
potential strategy for meeting your b12
you just put that out there you can
because aphasic we will find ethical
food eaters the whole community now I've
read ethical Peters is now a new
subreddit so so we cannot get b12 from
our own gut bacteria right and that and
if there is an e b12 in soil it's only
from manure
you know that's come from animals
there's also zero evidence that b12 is
fed to cattle and there's no evidence
that humans have ever been able to meet
their b12 needs from just eating soil
and water if you pull up slide 56 Jamie
Jack Norris who's a vegan diet ition you
know we don't agree on a lot of things
but I appreciate his rigor with the
science he has a big article on b12 on
this website and it said he says the
suggestion that humans have ever relied
on uncleaned organic produce for vitamin
b12 doesn't have any reliable evidence
at this time so the I just I don't know
where to go with these that claim
because it's just this demonstrably
false even from the perspective of a
vegan registered dietitian yes yeah I
don't know why he said that either but I
just think that that's something he
probably heard and he's probably having
a conversation with someone and they
told him that and he just repeated it I
mean it's one of those may be one of the
doctors on the show yeah brought that up
so people repeat a lot of these things
and then they become Dogma so here's the
other thing the the second part of that
claim was up to 39% of people tested
including meat eaters are low in b12 as
a result best way for humans to get
enough b12 whether they eat animal foods
or not is simply to take a supplement he
didn't provide a reference for that so I
can't it's hard to check that but again
this contradicts you know mounds of
evidence on b12 deficiency
so they're you know there's there's four
stages of b12 deficiency I don't want to
go too far in the weeds here but
basically serum b12 which is the marker
that's usually used only goes down in
the fourth and final stage of b12
deficiency there are other markers that
will go out of range earlier that are
more sensitive and detect those earlier
stages so the the the most sensitive
markers holo Transco Battlement or whole
OTC so in a study in 2013 this is a
slide 58 Jamie they compared b12
deficiency depletion according to holo
Transco Ballymun levels in vegetarians
vegans and omnivores and you can see the
results here only 11% of omnivores had
b12 depletion 77% of vegetarians and 92%
of vegans that's a pretty big difference
it's a big difference it's a big
difference b12 is responsible for energy
that's where the reasons why when people
were feeling sick they get a b12 shot
well it's also required for the myelin
sheath and our nerves b12 deficiency can
cause serious and even irreversible
neurological damage a lot of the harm
that comes that happens with kids on the
vegan diet comes from b12 deficiency can
decrease fluid intelligence it can cause
neurological damage that's not
reversible even after they start eating
meat again maybe that's what's going on
with them in this information maybe they
have legitimate neurological damage is
that possible it's possible there's
because I'm just passionate about this
because it's super important slide 59 so
homocysteine is a marker that is also
more sensitive than serum b12 it's a
sticky inflammatory protein that's
associated with heart disease and
dementia so 9 out of 10 comparisons that
looked at b12 levels or homocysteine
levels in vegetarians and omnivores
found higher homocysteine levels in
vegans and vegetarians higher means
worse and it means more b12 deficient
and in fact the studies they said the
prevalence of hyper homocysteine amia
which is high homocysteine levels
reflecting low b12 among vegetarians may
actually be higher than among non
vegetarians already diagnosed with heart
disease
so this is kind of a big deal it's like
the b12 issue is serious and and even
folks like Jack Norris to their credit
do acknowledge it and and strongly
recommend that people who are on a vegan
diet supplement so if people watch this
film you know I'm glad to hear James
saying that that you know vegetarians
vegans should supplement
I don't think omnivores need to usually
but you can watch that film and get the
idea that that b12 you know is maybe not
that big of a deal right it's a big deal
a lot of the film was reenactments as
well you know like when James was
sitting there with the knee braces on
that was not after a surgery I thought
he was vegan in like 2011 or I know or
something when he he's in the film when
they're filming him he's sitting there
doing his research well I don't think
they filmed him while it was happening
but I mean this is like one of the
things that I thought was well done
about the film was that they took
someone James yes on the kind of the
journey of starting as an omnivore and
then you know having this real these
realizations and turning into a vegan
but the problem was that journey
happened long before the film was made
exactly that was a little disingenuous
so that's why I'm saying he's sitting
there with those knee braces on and he's
going over his research and just happen
to have a camera crew there why he's
learning how to heal himself I'm like
hey man I know what you're doing I don't
know I mean that's a narrative devised
it's good filmmaking even the Rope thing
even the Rope thing I mean I'm watching
him do the Rope thing at the end like
whew boy I'm done you didn't our Pro if
you did an hour you'd be fucking
drenched with sweat and you'd be
exhausted you wouldn't did you they
sprayed you or something like that but
that's fine I believe he really did that
I don't believe he's a liar but like
yeah I mean he'd like you said he's
clearly athlete
yeah and ripped and you know super
capable and this was a you know an
agenda driven film it was yeah it's
meant to persuade and convince people
that's why it's weird because that's
clearly acting there you're recreating
these moments but it's billed as a it's
right marketed as a documentary because
he's talking about it having just
happened right after he switched over to
a vegan diet all of a sudden he could do
an hour on the battle ropes and then
they're filming him
no Mike come on man there's no fucking
camera crew with that happen you're
redoing this yeah you think I mean I get
it this is how you show the footage you
put it out there and it makes it like a
little bit better for people to swallow
and get you know and I like the scenes
of him doing the self-defense
demonstrations because you get to see he
truly is a fantastic martial artist he
really doesn't know his stuff absolutely
there's a lot of great aspects to that I
like I said I like that guy a lot but
there's a lot of fuckery in this movie
man so I mean a couple of the most
ridiculous things from the movie I'm get
two boners we can get the boner slide 64
you probably remember this morning this
was the guy who's like in Africa he was
a former Special Forces yes and he says
this whole fantasy we need to eat meat
to get our protein it's actually
bullshit I mean look at a grill a grill
that will fuck you up in two seconds
what does a gorilla eat I just do the
same things these big great things out
here that we're trying to protect
elephant and rhino yeah well it's just
it's a nonsensical argument you know
what will fuck you up even faster than
the gorilla a human who has a gun it
eats McDonald's and KFC I'm serious what
is a gun it's a tool how did we develop
tools because we started eating meat and
fish and we came down out of the trees
and we weren't spending more than half
of our waking hours eating leaves and
low calorie fruits you know we don't
like comparing our digestive like what
we should eat with a gorilla is just
asinine that's a problem because they
bring that up all the time they say we
have the same digestive gut tract as an
herbivore that's just not true
also just objectively false yeah now the
the large for a gorilla the largest
volume volume of their digestive tract
is in their large intestine which is
ideal for breaking down tough foods you
know fiber seeds and those kinds of
plant foods
whereas in humans the largest volume of
our digestive tract is in the small
intestine which is better for absorbing
nutrient dense bioavailable foods like
meat and cook
foods cook tubers and things like that
you know gorillas in order to get the
amount of protein that gets them strong
and rich they eat forty to sixty pounds
of food a day and they're eating for
more than half of their waking hours so
it's really you know that's just not
comparable at all to compare us to we
also have different genes is the same
thing when they're talking about ox is
like the strong as an ox there's a mile
statin issue right yes there's the genes
are programmed to carry more muscle
so yeah that's Patrick booming you know
people ask me how did you get strong as
an ox without eating meat and have you
ever seen an ox eating meat well I say
have you ever seen a human with six
different stomachs standing in a field
eating you know grass for 14 hours a day
right it's ridiculous it's not it's like
to me those those damage the credibility
of the movie because that's just sound
bites it sound cute like people yeah
you ever seen an ox eat that eat what a
gorilla eat that's what I dunno I just
write it just to me though that's like
the quality of the argument being made
it really does know when they're like
you dispute it that's the problem we you
know that's why I bring you aboard I
mean and then there was the
anthropologist woman you remember that
scene in the end where she that that's
where I really started rolling my eyes
cuz she was making the arguments that
humans have always followed a
plant-based diet did you remember that
part Italy okay so we were to start with
that so I mean we've got isotope studies
that show that humans have been eating
meat for at least two and a half million
years and if you go back even before
we're really actually human there's a
lot of evidence now that our chimp
ancestors were also eating vertebrates
and one of the biggest shocks for people
has been the observation that chimps
hunt and they kill other ant monkeys and
other animals and eat them I mean it
kind of blew apart like this whole idea
of primates only being you know eating
plants and if that happened if if an
animal evolves complex behavior like
hunting or tool use in order to eat sir
food it means that food has a lot of
value or else that that behavior
wouldn't have evolved but then we have
bone collagen studies let me see if I
can find this slide Jamie so that's 47
and 48 so these are bone collagen
isotope studies are much more accurate
than some of the previous methods that
were used and the the earliest hominids
that were studied but these were
Neanderthals so there's three studies
that have been done in Neanderthal
groups ranging from one hundred and
thirty thousand to twenty thousand years
ago and then it compared those isotope
levels with contemporary species and
they found that Neanderthals were
similar to top-level carnivores so they
all derived the vast majority of their
protein from animal sources likely to be
large herbivores and then on the next
slide 48 why does it have hold on second
backup why don't I have a pterodactyl
fly in the background why they
bullshitting us does those fucking
things live 60 fucking million years
before that's so stupid you know there's
a limit to what stock photography can I
know out you asshole why have a guy
walking on two feet with a fucking piece
of meat on this deck of me that's so
stupid and he's obviously not in the
under tall to double crazy so that's a
homo sapien which is only 500,000 hours
ago that stock photo so let's talk about
homeless again so so there there were on
the next slide there two two stable
isotope bone collagen studies have been
done with modern humans Homo sapiens
sapiens and the first group was thirteen
thousand years ago in southern England
and the second group was 30 to 40,000
years ago unlocker vet which is in
France and they also found that they
were predominately large herbivores but
the French group consumed the more
diverse mix of protein including seafood
so the fossil record clearly clearly
indicates that humans were eating you
know humans and Neanderthals APNs and
Neanderthals all over our hominid
ancestors were eating a lot of meat and
she wasn't using any evidence to cite
this either was she she was using
lame anatomical argument that we have
you know relatively flat molars like
herbivores do and we don't have claws we
don't have sharp canine teeth right but
guess what
we've got Forks we've got knives and we
got fire we've got fire to cook our food
and we have fire for a long fuck yeah
these adaptations that make those
anatomical characteristics that a lion
or you know are carnivorous animal has
unnecessary for us I mean that's that's
just like anthropology 101 right I don't
actually just found someone who's vegan
who's also apologist and then they
rewrite the whole history of you know
animal food consumption among hominids
yeah and the argument that human beings
over two million years ago the doubling
of the human brain size corresponds with
the the learning how to hunt community
of toolmarks on Boas correspondent
directly with the doubling of brain
volume the reduction in our gut volume
which indicates and move to a more
nutrient-dense diet the increase in the
volume of our small intestine relative
to our large intestine and then what's
called the gray cell is a ssin of our
jaw which means our teeth and jaw became
less robust and that's thought to be an
adaptation to more digestible
nutrient-dense bioavailable food where
we're not like chewing cud or yes you
know chewing on leaves or low-calorie
fruits like a gorilla is all there in
this argument about nutrient density
this is why this that that term is very
important because people always want to
use that for plant-based foods nutrient
dense plant-based foods meat is far more
nutrient dense per calorie per ounce
poor amino acid profile the with
essential nutrients yeah so it's
essential meaning nutrients that we
can't manufacture in our own and that we
and then we absolutely need organ meats
are actually at the top of the list in
terms you know in terms of nutrient
density organ meats and shellfish take
the cake then you have herbs and spices
are actually pretty high too and then
you have other you know muscle meats
eggs all those things foods like grains
and legumes are tend to be towards the
bottom of the list you know with
vegetables and in
right but that sounds good
nutrient-dense plant-based foods sounds
good it sounds like you're doing the
right thing so this is like where this
lingo is coming from I mean this is
where I argue that plants do belong
because plants do have certain nutrients
phytonutrients fibers and things that
that actually don't feed us but feed our
gut flora that I do think are important
even though they're not considered
essential like vitamin b12 or vitamin A
you know
vitamin D or something like that I do
think they're still important and they
play a role what I'm talking about is
the difference between cavemen altering
its diet or the modern or ancient man
altering their diet and this doubling of
the human brain size corresponding with
consuming more nutrient-dense foods what
that means is meat yeah absolutely meat
fish and fish first as we saw with some
of the modern humans who were living in
coastal regions
yeah she's more about bioavailable
nutrient dense foods definitely now what
what are their silliness so this is the
Anthropology argument that just doesn't
seem to fit any of the state-of-the-art
science doesn't fit yeah it completely
contradicts oh so then there was a whole
section that you probably remember about
chicken and fish causing cancer dairy
products causing cancer they started
just it really kind of went from just
like you can do well on a plant-based
diet as an athlete to like animal
products are horrible and I'm gonna kill
you which was a you know a big leap so
they had one study James Wilk says you
know research funded by the National
Cancer Institute found that vegetarians
who had one or more servings per week of
white meat like chicken and fish more
than tripled their risk of colon cancer
well that's scary you know I don't want
to triple my risk of colon cancer but
again if you look at the totality of the
research slide 42 Jamie 2017 a
meta-analysis of 16 prospective studies
with with almost two and a half million
participants found no increase in cancer
risk from consuming fish or poultry and
then you have a statement from the
American Cancer Institute itself saying
as for other animal products
organizations that do comprehensive
reviews to make dietary recommendations
currently do not recommend against
poultry like chicken turkey ground or
fresh fish or dairy so where's that
coming from then one study that looked
at seventh-day Adventists who added some
of those foods back into their diet this
is a perfect example of healthy user
bias because seventh-day Adventists are
not supposed to eat meat so if you have
a seventh-day Adventist who's bucking
the trend and eating me then what else
are they doing that is also not healthy
and not following the dictates of that
healthy lifestyle mmm that was that into
consideration then asked him whether
they're drinking or I was a six-year
study in the seventh-day Adventist
cohort from 1976 to 1982 and it was what
I call them SDA rebels you know they're
supposed to eat vegetarian but they on
meat so what else are they doing that's
kind of condensing and the reason why
this is relevant is this is the only
study that we know of that does show a
correlation between there might be other
individual studies that do but this is
why we have these large reviews that
look at you know this one looked at 16
studies with two and a half million
participants and found no association
and then that's why you have groups like
the American Cancer Institute who say
you know recommend well I mean people
were up in arms at the most recent
recommendation that can't do that we
people have been told to avoid red meat
oh yeah and then they said well actually
there's no risk at all eating red meat
we're taking that off of the list of
foods to avoid and everybody went hey
shit they just went apeshit let's talk
about the lack of a better term yeah
they did they freaked out yes so
conflicts with the dogma absolutely and
this was this was a five paper review so
it wasn't just one paper it was five
papers all in one review it was millions
of participants you know they reviewed
all of the available literature on red
meat you know and in its relationship
with any disease heart disease cancer
type two diabetes
it was dozens of studies following
people for up to 35 years
Millions again millions of participants
they looked at randomized controlled
trials they looked at observational
cohort studies they looked at all kinds
of outcomes on the total mortality
cardiovascular cancer etc and they found
quote only low or very low certainty
evidence that red meat causes any kind
of disease and in in the editorial in
the annals which is what it was
published annals of internal medicine
the journal was published and they said
quote this is slide nineteen Jamie over
and over again they the author's
stressed that even if the results were
statistically significant their
certainty was low and the absolute
difference is seen were small and
potentially confounded meaning could
have been that they were smoking more or
drinking more or right now not exercises
or whatever the editorial also said this
is sure to be controversial but it's
based on the most comprehensive review
of the evidence to date because that
review is inclusive those who seek to
dispute it will be hard-pressed to find
appropriate evidence with which to build
an argument unless you have a nice
documentary yeah yeah the really
frustrating thing for people is also
recommend process it's unprocessed and
processed so the the dog men always been
well to stay away from processed meat
and universe' some studies showed no
difference with fresh but some
difference with the process red meat you
know I think you could make a stronger
argument that process too much processed
meat might be harmful because of things
like and nitroso compounds that are
formed etc but even then you have to
consider context most people are eating
hot dogs with buns and french fries and
big gulps Wow right it might it's
probably a different effect than having
bacon a couple times a week with your
Whole Foods diet or having some salami
and nuts you know not the same as eating
you know fake processed meat all the
time and one of the things that's weird
about this whole conversation is it's
it's there's a battleground so like a
volley gets thrown
out there like this like boom it's okay
to eat red meat and you see the other
side scrambling to refute the evidence
and and then fire back with all these
epidemiology studies that show that red
meat can kill eeeh
and red meats causing you to age quicker
red meat kills your boners and red meat
does this and does that and it's like
it's it's with there's a religious war
going on it's the same weird thing we
were talking about earlier now when you
have some kind of political event or
some event that happens it gets spun you
know if you go watch CNN it's gonna get
spun one way if you go watch Fox it's
gonna get spun the other way it's the
same event but you have these totally
different interpretations yeah what else
was Obama
well you want to talk about the boners I
found that to be entirely hilarious
ruthlessly unscientific yeah and like
the whole thing with the guy saying you
know I'm gonna eat what a gorilla eats I
mean they're showing this guy who's
protecting rhinos who are being
slaughtered for their for their horns
like what does that have anything to do
with eating meat yeah they're they're
morally equated that with eating exactly
murder well dude what they're doing is
pretty obvious what they were doing yes
even though they didn't say that what
they were doing they're attaching
themselves to an indisputable cause yeah
you know I mean everybody wants people
to stop shooting rhinos for their horns
everyone does if you don't you're an
asshole don't eat meat what yes not that
in there what the fuck did you do yeah
yes so the for those who haven't seen
the film that the the erection that the
boner experiment if we're gonna call it
that if they it was Aaron Spitz who the
urologist and he puts penis rings on a
bunch of NFL players and then he looks
at measures the effects of different
meals on their erections both the the
circumference I guess the size of the
erection the duration intensity of the
erections so he feeds the players
burritos with meat in them and then he
feeds them the same burrito with like a
plant protein I'm not sure what it was
tempeh or something like that and then
he claims beans was the beans okay yeah
maybe
and any claims at that fleets who ate
the pureplant burritos had 500% more
frequent erections and also increased
strength of erections so hmm what can we
conclude from this experiment absolutely
nothing because it was just an
experiment that was made up and done in
a film it was not peer reviewed there
was no it's not scientific at all you
know that's the whole scientific well he
could have been scientific right if they
did it in different orders so they put
the the the penis band on the dudes one
night they had him eat whatever the fuck
they had I mean you know a thing with
steak burritos and then the next night
they put the penis bands on them again
and they have a meat beans and so they
say you got more erections
did you guys jerk off in between them
did you guys have sex did you get used
to having the penis band on when you
slept with it the first time did it
bother you did it interrupt your sleep
the second time were you more
comfortable with it did you guys try to
reverse it one day the first day on a
different group of people give them the
band and make them eat a vegetarian diet
then the next day give them the band on
the second day and make them eat steak
did you did you switch that up you can
ask any number of questions and that's
the whole point it's obsession that's
why we have science that's why we have a
process of peer review that's why we
have reproducibility meaning even if one
group comes up with one finding it's not
really worth much until somebody else
reproduces that something like 90 90
percent or more of findings scientific
findings are not reproduced well that's
that means that we can't trust them so I
would like to know if they were asked to
not engage in sexual intercourse or
masturbation during that time period
because that would that would make sense
that they were getting more erections
and more fuller erections the next day
especially the young guys that are you
know savages well I went to them playing
football I went to look at research like
is there any peer-reviewed research that
shows that plant-based diets are better
for erectile function and lower the risk
of erectile dysfunction couldn't find
anything I did find studies one study of
a Mediterranean diet which includes
animal some animal products reduced
erectile disfunction relative to a
low-fat diet
which maybe might have fewer animal
products that kind of contradicts it
perhaps there were studies that showed
that like diet quality is more is
important so Western diet and high in
processed foods led to erectile
dysfunction diet rich in flavonoids
containing foods which be fed fruits and
vegetables reduced erectile dysfunction
but none of that says it has anything to
do with meat just says like don't eat a
junk food diet
we don't want erectile dysfunction yeah
it's just deceptive oh there was another
but you know it does show that those
guys did get more hard-ons
under that circumstance but as you said
what does that mean what does it mean
and and can we even dressed it I mean
frankly given some of the other stuff in
the film right can you trust it can you
trust right I mean who's to say right
now there was another thing that was
deceptive or at least it confused people
that's when they made them eat a bean
burrito and they checked their blood and
blood okay that's that was I was just
sitting there shaking my head going what
in the fuck are you doing this has
nothing to do with health so again not a
peer-reviewed experiment something that
was controlled studying anyway just
something that they did in the film so
they fed the burritos you know with me
without me and they measured their blood
afterwards
big surprise if the people who ate meat
which has more fat and more saturated
fat had cloudier blood well that's
normal that's just naturally what you
would expect from the process of eating
feet you must temporarily have more fat
in your blood it's nothing to do with
health so what is the big question might
accident better why you might be better
for you and so then I went and I thought
okay well what does the peer-reviewed
research show about animal protein and
endothelial function because their claim
was that eating the animal protein
reduces your endothelial function and it
increases inflammation so this I there
there was one study that a lot of the
there are a couple studies that show a
low carb diet impairs endothelial
function but they tend to be short term
like four weeks I looked for longer-term
studies there was a 2009 study that
followed subjects for 12 weeks and they
found the low-carb diet actually
improved endothelial function whereas a
low-fat diet decreased it and then there
was a 2007 study that followed subjects
for a year and there was no change in a
no thelia function on a low-carb diet we
actually there's strong evidence that
high blood sugar and insulin resistance
impaired endothelial function so you
know low carb diet that would lower your
blood sugar and improve insulin
resistance would be expected to improve
it from that perspective so again when
you look at the actual science the
actual peer-reviewed research you don't
see that relationship that they're
talking about they didn't even I mean
when they're showing it to you it's just
scare tactics they're not they're not
talking about what that means wasted
people see it oh my god the blood is
cloud even the football players who are
in the experiment they were like oh wow
I'm not gonna eat my KFC or Popeyes
anymore and I'm like well you probably
shouldn't but it's not for that reason
right well saturated fat is the demon
right that keeps getting addressed
explain why saturated fat is not only
healthy but probably necessary well I
don't know that it's necessary but I
would I would say that you know why I
should say cholesterol is nicer well
cholesterol is necessary and our body
makes it to actually most of the
cholesterol that we have in our body we
manufacture it doesn't come from the
diet about 30 percent comes from the
diet about 70 percent we we make it the
exact ratio varies depending on the
person and you know some people are
hyper responders of dietary cholesterol
so they'll absorb more from food but
it's you know it plays a vital role in
the body there's a genetic disease
called Smith Laemmle Opitz
syndrome which results in severe
cholesterol deficiency and it's it's
fatal
so you die with not enough cholesterol
I'm not however one of these people on
the other end of the spectrum that
thinks hey if your cholesterol is 450
don't worry no problem there's you know
like you know just write it off I think
the truth is somewhere in the middle and
by
logical bearable it's variable yeah you
can get I and I see this you know I've
been working with patients for over 10
years I test every single person that
comes through the door with a full lipid
panel and I have people who are doing
keto super low carb diets who have
totally optimal normal cholesterol and
then I have people who go from eating
you know a moderate fat diet to like a
high fat keto or low carb diet and their
LDL P goes up to 2,500 or 3,000 and
their LDL cholesterol goes up to 300 so
yeah I mean what I can I think what
stepping back a little bit as we talked
about this with Joel but cholesterol for
decades was like it was the boogeyman
you know it was like that led to like
egg white omelets and boneless skinless
chicken breasts and you know bagels with
nothing on them okay when I was growing
up and now even the margarine margarine
oh my god I believe it's not butter yeah
I thought it was better than butter
which like rats won't even eat if you
leave it out in the garage really yeah
yeah
so batteries they won't eat margarine
that's what I've heard I've never done
this experiment experiment to do it
otherwise we're pushing out
disinformation as well propaganda good
so yeah you know the US quietly actually
removed the limitation of dietary
cholesterol they used to limit it to 300
milligrams now that they don't have that
anymore because the evidence didn't
justify having that in the Dietary
Guidelines we were the last
industrialized country to do that every
other company country had done that
years ago right but because you know the
how entrenched that was in our country
and I think you know that they don't
want to lose credibility it's like
they've been saying not to do something
for so long then to turn around say
actually right there's no evidence to
support that it's it's it's you lose
face and when people talk about
saturated fat and they talk about it as
being only a meat or animal diet issue
one thing that I always like to bring up
is avocados
yeah there's a certain amount of
unsaturated fat and saturated fat every
food has all three fat's in some
proportion so you have saturated
monounsaturated and polyunsaturated and
dairy products are actually the only
category of foods that consistently have
more saturated fat than any other type
of fat pork for example often has more
monounsaturated fat than saturated and
even sometimes yeah lean beef and what's
really interesting about that is that
studies consistently show that full fat
dairy which would be like the highest
saturated fat class of foods is is
associated with reduced risk of heart
disease reduce risk of diabetes reduce
weight and all kinds of other
improvements full fat dairy is focus's
dairy like raw milk
they don't different you know they're
not differentiating like that in the
study full fat dairy
why do you think so many people are
lactose intolerant then because it
seemed that that's an issue and I think
I seem to have it a little bit and my
nine-year-old daughter definitely has
well so it wasn't until 11 you know
before 11 thousand years 12,000 years
ago we didn't raise animals for dairy so
there was no need that we only had to
digest lactose while we were
breastfeeding No so I'm like in a
hundred gather culture as soon as you
stop breastfeeding you no longer had the
need to digest lactose and so where our
bodies are efficient we stopped
producing lactase which is the enzyme to
break down lactose and for the rest of
our adult life but then about 12,000
years ago we we started you know if
somebody figured out hey let's drink
some milk from that ruminant animal over
there and milk dairy products help
people avoid starvation and there was a
good source of hydration and nutrients
and so that mutation started to spread
and now it's about one third of the
world has lactase persistence which
means they can digest lactose all the
way into adulthood and two-thirds don't
and it depends a lot on your ancestry
so 2/3 people are lactose intolerant
worlds that wow that's interesting so
the people who tend to be lactose
tolerant are people of your
peon particularly Northern European
descent like lactase lactose tolerance
or lactase persistence approaches like
97% in Scandinavia so Denmark Norway
Sweden they can almost all digest milk
and in East Africans so you have like
the Masai you know people who've been
raising cattle for a long time tend to
have those that capability whereas like
in Asia
other parts of Africa in other parts of
the world not as much
what difference if any does it make when
it's not a modulized and pasteurized in
terms of your digestion because for me I
don't have a problem with raw milk yeah
milk seems to be easy for me yeah I
think there is a difference I mean it
contains enzymes in it that help you
break down the lactose so that can make
a difference but I mean just I would
love to see research that further
differentiates the health benefits of
dairy according to whether it's organic
or whether it's modernized or not and
all that but even just talking about
dairy as a whole category when you had
dr. Walter Willett in there saying
there's evidence of hiking high
consumption of proteins from Dario's
related to higher risk of prostate
cancer the chain of cancer causation
seems pretty clear but if you bring up
slide 44 Jamie this there was a 2019
study largest review of dairy ever been
done before it was a hundred and fifty
three meta-analysis that they reviewed
so not just individual studies they
reviewed 153 studies that were also
reviewing other studies and 84 percent
of the meta analyses on dairy showed
either no association or an inverse
association between dairy and cancer
meaning when it's inverse it means
people who ate more dairy had lower
rates of cancer whoa
so I just it's frustrating you know to
see someone make a claim like that and
then you go and you look at the full
totality of the research and you see a
just exhaustive study like this with a
hundred and fifty three men analyses and
84 percent are showing no relationship
or a beneficial effect of dairy on
cancer why wasn't that mentioned in the
film well it's consistent with the way
the message is being destroyed
through the entire film it's it's a
propaganda movie I mean that's
essentially what it is yeah yeah so it's
like reefer madness for me it really is
yeah yeah so it's kind of crazy it is
crazy I mean there's this there's the
the thing that's hard I mean and this
was true with with Joel's like that was
three and a half hour plus debate I
don't know how long we've been going now
and we've even barely scratched the
surface of like what we could say about
the movie
yeah and it's fresh it's frustrating
because the the movie these kinds of
movies leverage this rhetorical effect
called the illusory truth effect which
is basically if you repeat something
enough times it starts to sound true yes
and politicians are great at this Trump
is actually a master at this so you know
meat is bad meat is bad meat is bad meat
is bad we've heard that so many times
that someone can get on make a film and
just include one little tidbit of
information and say meat is bad and it
seems like oh that's true but then to
break that down we're here for two and a
half hours and we're just getting
started
yeah that's the trouble yeah that is the
trouble and it's not nearly as visually
enticing just you and me so now you're
talking well where's the pretty girls
running track and yeah buddy laughing
and having a good time eating falafels
where the you know there's how many
vegan documentaries that have been made
like a lot what a health cowspiracy this
one how many you know Pro regenerative
agriculture holistically managed healthy
nutrient-dense meat movies can you think
of I can't think of any yeah so there's
one coming originally it's called sacred
cow it's coming out next year
Rob wolf is involved in that I was
interviewed by it it's made Diana
Rodgers who's a registered dietitian is
making it she's also regenerate
regenerative farmer so it's a very
interesting perspective having someone
who knows the nutrition side and who's
also actually using those kind of
regenerative holistically managed
practices on our own farm you know but
it's not James
one's not behind it right not gonna have
Arnold in it you know Arnold's eating a
steak right now
that motherfucker he's full of shit he
just wanted to do it James cameras like
look we're doing the Terminator I really
want you to be a part is I'll do it I
mean only vegetables from now on the
steak was just bullshit that shouldn't
have eaten it I want to catch that
motherfucker fuck with the child with
that little chip on green just hacking
it look I mean the steak is well so big
the thing is he didn't become mr.
universe by eating drinking soy protein
shakes well I mean he again he's eating
steroids that's what he's eating that's
what he was but he was eating also 250
pounds of beef proteins a day 50 grams
you know he wasn't he wasn't eating you
know five cups of lentils no do that no
so it was that's the other thing too you
have to recognize with this movie like a
lot of the people who were amazing
athletes who they didn't start out vegan
they weren't born you know to vegan
parents and then we're vegan growing up
and then you know had made all these
amazing records and performance they
built their strength or their agility or
their speed or whatever on a diet with
animal products and then at some point
they became vegan and you know maybe
their performance continued and they
continued to do well like Scott Jurek or
doggie pouch or maybe they had the vegan
honeymoon where they did well for a
while and then they declined or maybe
they just declined like some of the NBA
and NFL athletes we talked about but
this is a critical point because there
are key developmental periods when we're
kids and also in utero that like if
you're not getting the nutrition you
need then it's gonna carry through to
your whole life yes and so it's like
what did your parents see what did what
did that your mom eat when she was
breastfeeding you what did you eat as a
young kid so we follow that whole
argument through if everyone becomes
plant-based it's going to have a
huge intergenerational impact on
performance it's not like people who
built their strength and performance
eating meat and then they go vegan they
do okay for a little while it's like
what are the consequences of that
happening to everyone consequences of
growing up nutritionally deficient yeah
of the mom starting that way
and then you know getting pregnant and
becoming deficient during pregnancy and
then the baby being breastfed by a mom
who's nutrient deficient and then the
kid being fed a vegan diet and
developing beet b12 deficiency which
then becomes irreversible effects are
there any top of the food chain world
champion vegan athletes they like the
best of the best
well there is no there's no vegan UFC
champions there's no world champion
vegan boxer so there's Ilya iliyan do
you know him he's the weight
weightlifter that's I think in the same
weight class as Kendrick Farris who was
in the film mm-hmm and two-time Olympic
champion where I don't I don't think
Kendrick is one he's not won a gold
medal but he was stripped of his titles
because he tested positive for steroids
so once again you know right what's
happening it's hard to say what he was
pulled from the film because that right
yeah he was pulled from the or was he in
the film I believe he was originalist
right I don't know that you brought this
yeah that's not a good narrative for
them right right and then they had like
Tim shieff if I'm pronouncing his name
correctly he was he's like the free
runner parkourers gonna be in the film
and then he had this very public I'm not
vegan anymore because it was destroying
my health video on YouTube he ate a
piece of salmon and had a wet dream for
the first time a decade okay I mean it
was like poor bastard yeah I was
starving he was doing everything pot he
did a 30-day water fast
yeah he like he tried everything to stay
on the vegan diet yeah it wasn't like oh
it's hard I'm gonna eat salmon I should
also tell you he thinks the Earth's flat
Oh does he
yes oh yeah yeah a bit that could be the
vegan diet all those years rottenness
fucking brain yeah well one of the main
guys you know the the
anthropological argument that humans are
herbivores because we don't have claws
and sharp teeth that all comes from
Milton Mills in 1987 paper from him he's
an emergency room physician he has no
training and medical anthropology or
comparative anatomy or anything like
this
he is a creationist so he thinks that we
were just built less way and with these
jumped in the way by God yeah that that
hole why don't we this if we are
carnivorous species why don't we this
how come we don't have the teeth to that
you know how come you can't just grab a
squirrel and eat it I've actually heard
a guy say that well hey fuckface how
come you can't eat lentils you got to
boil them yeah like what are you talking
about man try eating cassava without
cooking it you'll die sign yeah
poisoning yeah it's like that argument
is so stupid there's a lot of
plant-based foods that are only consumed
after lengthly cooking yeah I mean going
back to your question I'm sure there are
high-level vegan athletes but the thing
is a lot of the people who are commonly
referred to like the vena the the
Williams sisters Serena and Venus
they're not vegan yeah why do they we
have there in the film they showed them
in the film and I was like wait a minute
they're not vegan because they're often
people often call them vegan they
occasionally will have periods of
veganism I guess I said they're not
vegan they eat meat they eat animal
products look like Tom Brady is another
example another one who looks like a
meat-eater who you know really does eat
a lot of you know you know predominantly
plant-based I guess but eats meat
especially in the winter the Williams
sisters are so powerful I mean it would
be a great like catch for that team
right if they were vegan because like
look at the athleticism that these girls
have yeah but nope but it was weird they
didn't say they were vegan they just
showed them and so you're like oh
they're the best they don't need to say
it yeah that's it Arnold he's talking
great about veganism I
guaran-fucking-tee right now diving into
a nice juicy area bye come on show me a
picture where is he doing
oh that fuck epicMealTime he did a video
at them like five years ago you know
eighty thousand calorie
steak and egg sandwich Jesus Christ
Arnie when does this ostrich eggs ago
oh that's five years ago bro that's a
long time I could be all vegan now I
guess but I doubt it they did he was
doing this while they were doing the new
Terminator movie you know as a James
Cameron movie he's not stupid
college boy and even if he is now he
didn't you know you didn't he wasn't
then when I accomplished all of his
athletic yeah of course yeah but that's
where it's weird right it's like he did
everything spectacular with meat and now
he's saying you don't need it yeah yeah
it's pretty later he's part time vegan
he's saying in this article now now like
two years after that Epic Meal Time
thing Oh concept like how are you part
vegan you know I'm sure vegans would
take issue with that all right guy you
know arguing with someone about this
once I talked about this he said I'm 90%
vegetarian and this was his argument
like that like vegetarians way to go I'm
90% vegetarian like bitch that's zero
[Laughter]
it's even more ridiculous with vegans
because before all it takes sometimes a
little because like organ meats and
shellfish and fish and eggs are so
nutrient dense you don't have to eat a
lot of them to get to get the meat your
nutrition I had this conversation with
vegans - about mollusks and I was like
you know I've heard it argued and Sam
Harris was talk to me about this that
you could actually make an ethical
argument that mollusks are more
primitive than plants and that plants
actually exchange more information
through mycelium to the root structure
and they actually communicate much other
evidence of intelligence yeah their
mouths are an older creature and they're
they're just dumb hunks of meat you
could scoop out of a container I mean
they have no idea you're there
they have just basic movement with a
clamp shut that's it I mean they're not
going stop no they're not trying to get
away like a fish mollusks just fucking
lay there and
happened to be like I said among the
most nutrient-dense food on the planet
like one serving of oysters I think will
meet your need for saying for the entire
week yes that's pretty mean that's we're
talking about yes and that's always been
associated with male virility yeah so
many different functions it's also
owners who should have done that test
right eat a bunch of oysters imagine
that ready eight times more than the
guys who were eating plants with the
ring around their penis yeah what else
is going on with this film that drives
crazy well I mean going back to the
whole environmental argument I mean yes
that's another big one we didn't get a
chance to talk about that as much with
Joel because it would have been nine
hours instead of four hours he would
have yeah communicating is just so
frustrating it's so it's so awkward and
car salesmen E so one of the most common
claims is like you know calorie ting all
of the human food so like we you know
corn and things that we could feed the
world with yes well the reality is 86%
of what cattle eat is is not edible by
humans we talked about that before
they're eating soy cakes and grass and
fobs and things that we can't digest and
absorb but I think the argument would be
that if you just grew the same like use
that same area to grow human food you
could do that because we're using that
area to grow cow food well so you
replace the the feedlot beef with
grasslands and then you have naturally
you know holistically managed cattle
there and then you take the land that we
can't as I said before sixty percent of
land you can't grow crops on so it's not
it's you can't say that you can't say we
can just take everywhere that we could
have livestock and plant nominated
saying that anywhere we have mono crops
where we're growing food just for eat
feeding cows you could grow say tomatoes
and that's one option but the other
option is to reuse that land for
grasslands which could create make it a
carbon sink rather than having still
emissions coming from Mauna industrial
agriculture I understand what you're
saying but I mean if I was on the other
side I would argue all that wouldn't it
be easier to just grow human edible corn
in that place instead of alone no no
because corn is
ridiculously low and nutrient value or
something else or soy or whatever yeah
if you look again this idea that animals
are the middleman yes that's not a bad
thing that's a good thing if you look at
the conversion ratio of feed like corn
which is super nutrient poor you know
corn is as low in protein it doesn't
have many nutrients at all two point six
to two point eight kilograms of corn get
converted into one kilogram of beef so
even of in that 14 percent of human
edible food that the cattle the
livestock are eating they're converting
it to highly nutrient-dense bioavailable
protein that humans can eat and if you
do the conversion with just protein
instead of like by weight of food they
take 0.6 kilograms of corn or other low
value protein and convert that into one
kilogram of very high-value
nutrient-dense protein so you know it's
always more nuanced then the argument
makes it seem really is another example
is gonna be so you know 2,400 gallons of
water to produce a pound of beef is the
typical claim that you hear what you
don't hear is that vast majority of
water even from feedlot beef ninety four
percent is green water which means it
just it's rainfall and six only six
percent comes from greta's ground water
like from irrigation for pasture raised
beef it's even more significant ninety
seven percent of the water for pasture
raised beef comes just from rainfall and
three percent from irrigation and beef
really only if you only think about blue
water like irrigation it requires two
hundred and eighty gallons of blue water
per pound of beef that might sound like
a lot but it's actually less than you
need to produce a pound of avocados
almonds walnuts rice or sugar well you
don't hear that
no and in the film or in these arguments
at all and again speaks to what you're
saying this is these are nuanced issues
these are nuanced issues and the devil
is in the details
hmm and so we're talking about with cow
again we have to stress that only
somewhere in the neighborhood of two
three percent of all cows are grass fed
grass so the ones that are eating grain
are consuming more water but even then
it's still less water than they're
saying exactly and less than some other
commonly yes vegan foods especially
almonds almonds are particularly their
very resource heavy right absolutely
yeah but sugar I mean yeah that's crazy
huh yeah yeah um what else about the
film you want to talk about fake meat
sure yeah but yeah let's not cover it as
much in the film but it's good it's
important for something like you that
really understands it to talk about it
so people get its this could be a
standalone clip so just for people who
know who aren't aware there are
companies like impossible burger and
beyond me that are promoting this idea
of fake meat that tastes like meat and
but it's made typically from soy so
impossible burgers main ingredients are
GMO soy coconut oil sunflower oil
natural flavors beyond meat is P protein
isolate canola oil refined coconut oil
so impossible Burger has publicly
criticized holistic land management and
a regenerative agriculture and saying it
doesn't it's not really that different
in fact sometimes the emissions can be
even more than feedlot beef but there
was a third-party lifecycle analysis
full lifecycle so they looked at the
whole process not just methane emissions
from cows burping but the whole process
at white oak pastures which is a beef
operation that's a it's a savory
Institute hub so they're following this
the regenerative savory Institute
practices and they found that their beef
operation was a net carbon sink so again
it actually sequestered carbon from the
atmosphere was not emitting carbon it
was you know carbon not not neutral it
was taking carbon out this is something
I forgot to bring up earlier one thing
that solves the methane issue with cows
is just to add a certain amount of
seaweed to their diet when you add a
certain amount of seaweed to your
through there
apparently mitigates the methane the
methane issue I don't know about that
yeah I think you'd find that Jamie
that's um
something that was offered up as a
response to and I don't think it's a
large amount of seaweed I think it's a
fairly small amount of seaweed and
percentage to the overall diet I think
the amazing thing about the regenerative
agriculture and it can be I can restore
the soil and improve the soil so you're
not only producing this amazing
nutrient-dense bioavailable food source
you're actually improving the soil and
helping to reverse this really dramatic
threatening problem that we're facing of
soil erosion seaweed could help make
cows burp less methane and cut their
carbon footprint LOL diet supplemented
with red algae could lessen the huge
amounts of greenhouse gases emitted by
cows and sheep if we can just figure out
how to grow enough so i guess that's you
have to wonder where those how you know
what's what kind of energy is being used
so so back to this so this this life
cycle analysis at white oak pastures
showed that this holistically managed
beef actually removes carbon from the
atmosphere now this was the same company
that performed a lifecycle analysis for
impossible' burger and on their fake
meat and what they found in that
analysis was that the fake meat was less
you know of a greenhouse gas emitter
than feedlot beef but it was still
actually an emitter whereas the
holistically managed beef was taking
carbon out of the atmosphere
it was the same company so you know if
we're gonna give them credit for the
analysis they did for impossible' burger
we have to give them credit for the
analysis that they did for white oak
pastures the other thing with impossible
burgers so the primary ingredient is
called soy leg hemoglobin or slh so this
is a bio engineered protein additive
that adds meat like taste and color it
does not meet the basic FDA generally
recognized as safe' the grass
designation because it's not a food or
even a food ingredient and there's a
document that you can get I think it
came with the Freedom of Information Act
it's online I have the
friends in my show notes and in the
discussion in this document with the FDA
impossible foods admitted that up to a
quarter of a team ingredient was
composed of forty-six unexpected
additional proteins some of which are
unidentified and none of which were
assessed for safety in a dossier
impossible Berger put the product on the
market despite admitting to the FDA
privately that they haven't done
adequate safety testing and according to
these documents quote FDA believes that
the arguments present an individually
and collectively do not establish the
safety of slh soil egg hemoglobin for
consumption nor do they point to a
general recognition of safety so they
don't know what the fuck it does what's
in it but doesn't mean that doesn't mean
it's bad just haven't done adequate
safety testing to in the opinion of the
FDA to release this as a food product
the company that did the tests on this
impossible burger versus the
regenerative B what does that company
again Qantas international and so it's
the one they're the ones who release the
information for both studies both the
same company that did it for impossible
burger and they turned around and and
did it for white oak pastures and they
found impossible burger is still
emitting carbon whereas white oak
pastures is taking it out yeah I think
that's that's a very critical point yeah
in this kind of change and there's a
great there isn't an out an article
criticizing fake meat by this woman dana
pearls who's just you know part of an
environmental organization called
friends of the earth and she says quote
instead of investing in risky new food
technologies that are potential problems
masquerading as solutions shouldn't we
be investing in proven beneficial
regenerative agriculture and transparent
organic food that consumers are actually
demanding the only issue that they would
have with this is yes but now you're
talking about killing animals and we're
absolutely morally and ethically opposed
to killing animals
yeah i mean we go back now to this this
two thousand eighteen paper that I
mentioned earlier that examined the
impact of plant agriculture on animal
deaths and found 35 to 250 mouths deaths
per acre mouth death Mouse deaths deaths
of mice
and up to 7.3 billion animals killed
every year from plant agriculture if you
count Birds killed by pesticides fish
deaths from fertilizer runoff plus
reptiles and amphibians poisonings from
eating toxic insects from the pesticide
what's in them 7.3 billion animals a
year in terms of life there's far more
life taken by plant agriculture then
there is life taken by animal
agriculture even factory farming oh yeah
we're not killing 7.3 billion cows right
so the question is do we value the
larger animals more are they you know
are fish and insects less significant
life forms and mammals are small mammals
like rodents less valuable than larger
ones like cows is it better to kill many
small animals for foods like grains and
legumes which aren't very nutrient dense
and don't meet our nutritional needs
then fewer large animals that are super
nutrient dense I mean I'm not claiming
to answer these questions but I think
they're questions that haven't been
adequately raised and addressed in this
ethical argument they haven't even been
breached and that this is one that
people dismiss offhandedly this is these
are lies by meat-eaters to justify their
consumption but what you're saying is
you know you could make an ethical
argument that killing an animal
explicitly to eat it is ethically
different than animals being killed as a
sort of side effect of plant agriculture
I'm not saying that that's valid
argument but I've heard that argument I
don't think it's a valid argument
because once you're aware of it you're
doing it the same it's like the argument
that I've had with people when they say
that I don't kill animals but I eat meat
therefore it's better than what you do
because I hunt and I say well no you're
killing the animal with your credit
backwards you're killing an animal
you just get hiring someone to do it for
you you're still going to jail for
murder if you hire someone to shoot
somebody right it's your more
disconnected from the whole process
that's it's even more bizarre it's the
whole thing is very very strange I think
that's very important though that you
listed those those numbers that data
because that's irrefutable and it's one
of those arguments it comes up that they
just want to
their head in the sand about if you're
buying agricultural s you have unless
you have your own organic farm where you
are a hundred percent aware of every
single aspect from seed to plucking and
cooking if you're not if you're buying
from large-scale agriculture you're a
part of the deaf machine right that's
right and you're also part of the
environmental destruction machine
because these huge industrial scale mono
cropping operations are incredibly
harmful for the environment and if you
know if you again like you think of like
pea protein you know that's an
incredibly processed food like the
amount of you know first of all just
growing peas at the scale you're gonna
need to have the world's largest pea
protein company and then all of the
processing that needs to happen from
taking a pea to isolated protein powder
which involves fossil fuels and all
kinds of industrial processes that is
not an environment environmentally
friendly process so you know is that
better for the planet than having cows
that are you know being raised on in on
land that couldn't be used for growing
plants or other crop production and
rotating the the animals in a way that
restores grasslands and improves the
health of the soil that actually
sequester's and removes carbon from the
atmosphere that again like dana pearls
was saying makes a lot more sense it's a
proven system then like scaling up
industry to make more powders mmm yeah
scaling up industry to make peep out and
killing untold numbers of rodents in the
process you know and birds and
destroying natural habitats because
clear a field for peas it's not doesn't
have the normal natural features you
don't have the habitat for those animals
anymore I think it's so significant that
you're talking about these regenerative
farms because that really is the only
way you ever get the nutrients back into
the soil one of the I mean there was a
book that I read many years ago called
dead doctors don't lie or dr. Joel
Wallach talked about the mineral
depletion of our soil and that this is
something that they've known forever
that's like a slow degrading
the the nutrient density in the soil I
mean if that's one of the things that
keeps me up at night seriously like soil
and water if we don't have soil there's
no we don't know of any way to restore
soil once it's gone so we have 60 years
of soil sixty harvests left is that
years I don't I don't know I harvest is
probably more than once a year
I would guess really I don't know I'm
not a far I'm not a farmer either yeah
even if it is what I think it's once a
year but I mean even if it is once
you're yeah basically it's still 60
years is fucking terrifying terrifying
I'm not a streams coming yeah I got an
eight-year-old daughter yeah that's
right there'd be no food cannibals
running through the streets um
we'll have fake meat I don't even know
if we whoa buddy won't because you have
to grow soy yeah what will we have and
it will have no more fish left either
yeah what else
let's see god there's so much I just
don't know how anyone's gonna refute
this like I said I really like James a
lot but we if he decides to come back
and come and sit with you after hearing
this I'm watching this I don't know what
he could say well you know you can it's
like you said when a new study comes out
with the meat then you get the whole
group of people pointing to all that
epidemiology again saying look this
study says meet higher risk of cancer
then we have to do the whole thing again
help the user biased you know food
frequency questionnaire context is
everything you know that's why I say
yeah
I think we've hit most of the main
points here
anything else stand out in your mind
from the no watch it just this morning
oh okay
so I'd be remiss if we don't at least
touch on these so you know you said
before like the argument against red
meat has always been like cholesterol
and saturated fat yeah that's and it was
interesting in this movie
didn't really talk about that very much
they didn't talk about cholesterol a lot
they probably forgot they didn't forget
pretty sure I think what they're they
are actually acknowledging that those
aren't super defensible positions at
this point yeah and so they switched
over now to the new kids on the block
which are TMAO neu5gc and heme iron so
there was a guy who said let's see dr.
Scott Stoll that's slighty teen Jamie so
he says in animal products you're
getting protein packaged with
inflammatory molecules like neu5gc
endotoxins and heme iron when we consume
animal products it also changes the
microbiome and bacteria that live in our
gut and the bacterial species has have
been shown to promote inflammation over
grow and begin to produce inflammatory
meteors like TMAO so I'll briefly
address each of those but before I do
that I want to just say a word about
mechanisms versus outcomes so okay
nutrition research can focus on outcomes
which is like number of heart attacks or
number of deaths that happen in a
population over a given period of time
or it can focus on mechanisms what
caused those outcomes right so use the
example of red meat early you know they
saw in these big observational studies
that people who ate more red meat died
more or had more heart attacks or
whatever we know that that was because
of healthy user bias it wasn't you know
accurate finding whatever but so then
they start going trying to figure out
what are the mechanisms and so initially
the mechanism was saturated cholesterol
then it was saturated fat now those are
not as defensible so they're moving on
to these new mechanisms well research on
mechanisms is not very convincing if the
outcome isn't there so you had that
large paper that was just published the
five papers in the annals that showed
very basically no evidence that red meat
is correlated with any disease so why
are we even bothering looking for all
these mechanisms that explain why red
meat causes disease when we've got this
exhaustive study that says that it
doesn't yeah but let's humor them okay
and talk about these mechanisms for a
minute so neu5gc that
sugar basically acts as a signaling
molecule it helps distinguish self from
not self most mammals produce it humans
don't but like cows do so when we eat
the cow meat you know beef or drink milk
we get some new 5 GC and our tissues
this is the theory and then our body's
attack it in an autoimmune response so
basically the idea is that neu5gc in
meat causes an autoimmune response and
that increases the risk of disease the
problem is that hasn't been proven at
all 2003 paper found that feeding people
large quantities of neu5gc didn't
actually increase their serum levels of
neu5gc so that's a problem if you have
studies showing that eating it doesn't
actually increase in your blood then it
doesn't really make much of a difference
and then you have groups like the Masai
you could not design a diet higher in
five new neu5gc they they drink blood
and milk from cow and they eat cow beef
yeah and they have no you know extremely
low rates of cardiovascular disease and
they look great I mean have autoimmune
disease and are dying that early so
alright so that's new 5 GC then we have
heme iron so this is the form of iron
that's in beef and other animal products
so it is true that heme iron forms these
compounds called n nitro so compounds
and toxic aldehydes that are implicated
in in colon cancer but again context is
everything so slide 22 Jaime studies
have found that chlorophyll rich foods
like plants basically if you eat them
along with iron rich foods that cancels
out any potential harmful effect of heme
iron so this is that would be a great
point to a diverse diet versus a
carnivorous diet exactly this is what I
was talking about before where there's a
lot of clinical evidence that suggests
that plants play an important role yes
do I know for sure no I don't but I'm
just saying this is adds an element of
uncertainty so yeah green vegetables red
meat and colon cancer
chlorophyll prevents the cytotoxic and
hyper proliferative effects of heme in
Iraq
there was another thing that they talked
about earlier that I just remembered why
you were talking they were talking about
fuel and the difference between
carbohydrates for fuel and protein that
protein does not provide you with fuel
fuel for muscles which is not true
there's something that happens when your
body eats protein that it can break it
down to glycogen what is that called
gluconeogenesis yes yeah so that process
they just ignored in the film and the
woman spoke about this well when they
were who was it that spoke about it was
it I don't remember who spoke about it
oh I think was a man Douglas amendment
dr. Lewis so when when he when they were
so ever was it was speaking about it
when they were speaking about it they
were speaking about it like like well
here you go like this is Lycidas to fat
his clothes yeah kids clothes your body
needs carbohydrates to convert to
glycogen and that's not true everyone
know everyone who knows like if you eat
too much protein on a ketogenic diet
it'll knock you out of ketosis because
your body will convert it yeah if that's
everyone knows that I mean yeah so that
was a huge omission or
oversimplification I mean I think you
said this before and I agree with you
from for people who are doing explosive
types of activity like MMA or or you
know CrossFit or basketball or something
like that they're gonna typically do
better with some with carbohydrate you
know a substantial portion of
carbohydrate in their diet whereas it
definitely we're seeing a pattern now of
endurance athletes or endurance
activities a lot of those people can
thrive on a very low carb diet Zac
bitter one example but he's not just
arriving
I mean he's killing if he's murdering it
yeah he's literally a world champion at
running a hundred miles in under 12
hours which is just that's insane that's
that even is bomb percent yeah again
that guy's doing it on rib eyes and he
does take he was talking about how he
ups his glucose before these events yeah
he's not I want to be clear I've heard
him talk about this he's not full time
keto all the time he knows what he's
doing knows as he's approaching
competition he needs more glucose
replenish his glycogen stores extremely
scientifically
absolutely but it's it's not true to say
that protein that you don't need protein
for muscle
I mean protein is all about muscle
synthesis right can't do muscle protein
synthesis with without protein so that
was weird okay well also isn't it it
hasn't been shown I think Lane Norton
bio Lane was talking about this and his
debunking of the game-changers it's
actually been shown that glycogen
absorption or you they get more recovery
that's what it was from carbohydrates
mixed with protein yeah
then even carbohydrates alone or protein
alone that's why I post workout
nutrition often is suggested yeah both
protein and carbohydrates yes so there's
one more site I want to show on the heme
iron thing which is 23 and 24 so this is
the largest meta-analysis of heme iron
studies and again for people not
familiar with the term meta-analysis
it's where you look at all you know a
bunch of different studies that have
been done and you analyze them together
it's considered to be a very
high-quality form of evidence so they
looked at all significant studies
through 2015 and they found a
significant association between heme
iron and disease only in the American
cohorts in the Netherlands Canada France
Italy Japan and Sweden there was no
association found so what does that tell
us
go to the next slide please team well if
you eat heme iron in the context of a
super crappy standard American diet its
associated with cancer and a problem but
if you eat heme iron in a European diet
which is less crappy yes then the US
it's not this is a perfect example again
of context also Europeans did they don't
have grain fed steak
yes different quality but I think it's
probably more likely that they're not
eating that is far less grain fed grain
finished beef over there when you eat it
it's it's really evident when you have a
steak over there so TMAO and then gut
microbiota and I think we're done after
that okay no I think we did enough
no so TMAO this is a molecule that's
generated from choline ptain and
carnitine in the gut by a microbial
metabolism and some previous studies
showed that taking carnitine supplements
and taking choline supplements does
increase your blood levels of TMAO big
in omnivores they went up by like 37
micromoles per liter and in vegetarians
27 and that was you know art used to
argue that vegetarianism was healthier
because they didn't see as big of an
increase in TMAO in response to this
carnitine and choline challenge the
problem is research has not shown that
eating whole foods rather than taking
supplements increases TMAO significantly
especially eating meat and eggs there
was a study in 2014 showed you need to
eat four eggs in order to raise TMAO at
all and the max rise was only 3 to 6
micro moles per liter compared to 27 or
37 which I said from supplements in ssam
and 10 to 15 and others and then slide
25 Jamie this 1999 study tested the
effect of 46 different foods on the
urinary excretion of TMAO and six
different subjects and eggs and red meat
as you can see are barely even
registering on the scale there whereas
19 of 21 types of seafood raised TMAO
and halibut raised TMAO 53 times more
than eggs did so the number look at the
halibut graph was crazy and the cod so
here you have this argument okay
Kamio is bad we shouldn't eat red meat
and eggs because of TMAO but halibut
raises TMAO 53 times more than meat and
eggs and if you look at the research on
seafood consumption it's almost
universally associated with positive
outcomes you know lower risk of
cardiovascular disease lower risk of
death from early causes all of the rest
of it so how how do we reconcile that
here with this TMAO argument nobody has
ever explained how to reconcile that so
again interesting mechanism but the
research is not really persuasive it
seems like it's poorly understood in the
chart
yeah the other thing is that back in the
original paper by dr. Stan Hazen that up
about TMAO from 2013 this is slide 26
Jamie
he said the high correlation between
urine and plasma levels of TMAO argues
for effective urinary clearance of TMAO
so what that suggests is that even if we
eat TMAO our body clears it out pretty
quickly in the diet
so if TMAO is high it's probably because
of other factors and studies have found
at least 3 one is insulin resistance
increases TMAO levels by an enzyme in
the liver well we know that about 1 in 3
Americans probably have some form of
insulin resistance you know 70 percent
or overweight 40 percent of are obese so
it's possible that just being an insulin
resistant overweight American increases
your TMAO it's got nothing to do with me
gut microbiota like disrupted gut
microbiome and studies have also shown
that SIBO bacterial overgrowth in the
intestine can reduce can increase TMAO
levels ton of people are dealing with
that we know and then kidney disease
which of course happens in people who
have diabetes now 100 million Americans
have either pre-diabetes or diabetes can
also increase TMAO so you've got all of
these factors that just have to do with
again crappy lifestyle being overweight
being insulin resistant nothing to do
with me last point so there was a whole
section in the movie about
the meat ruining your gut microbiota and
they think we're referencing to very
very low carb diet studies that did show
a decrease in key species of protective
bacteria and also in butyrate
productions so this is also one of my
questions about Carnot carnivore you
know super low carb diet for a long
period of time but again context is
everything that's not necessarily the
effects of meat that's the effects of
not eating plant foods and there was a
good study slide 27 Jamie that it really
established this so it was 2019 study in
the in plus one so it's free full-text
access you can go look it up
got microbiome response to a modern
Paleolithic diet and a western lifestyle
context so they took I think they were
Italians and they had one group that was
on a they put a group of them on what's
called modern paleo diet you know so
obviously we can't recreate the Paleo
diet but just what we all talk about
when we say paleo and they found quote
an unexpectedly high degree of
biodiversity in modern Paleo diet
subjects which well approximates that of
traditional populations like the Inuit
hodza Nazis in Peru so they found that
eating a paleo diet made your gut
microbiota it looked like a
hunter-gatherer my paleo diet what we
mean is meats and vegetables meat non
starchy vegetables nuts and seeds fruits
and starchy tubers like sweet potatoes
so people who ate that diet had a
microbiota that resembled
hunter-gatherers which have the best
microbiota like studies have shown that
their microbiota is what we want to have
so this study shows it's not about the
meat it's about what you eat with me
which is difference which one makes
because we know what feeds our
microbiota fiber is there anything in
this movie that they got right till end
on a positive note yeah I mean I think I
agree with them on the problem like I
think feedlot CAFO weight beef and
livestock production is not the way to
go right I think it can be
environmentally destructive it's just
we're from there where they went with
the solution is not where I go they go
to plant-based vegan diet I go to
regenerative holistically managed
livestock you know shifting the food
production to a smaller scale or at
least shifting them the method of you
know plant production so it's less
industrialized and doing things that
actually can improve soil quality and
sequester carbon from the atmosphere
rather than scaling up more industry and
more technology well I hope this acts as
a guide for people that are confused
used by this and I hope people recommend
this because this is probably asked
Thoreau a breakdown as anybody's ever
done on that documentary and I just wish
people would stop doing this
I really wish they would just follow the
actual science even if it's inconvenient
to their dogma and it's a real problem
when people don't it really is because
it's it's confusing for folks and
there's a lot of people who suffer
health consequences because of that
confusion well it's a shame too and then
we talked about this with Joel like I
think actually vegans and people who are
recommending what we're talking about
now have a lot in common you know we
want better methods of food production
we care about the environment we care
about animals and animal welfare we just
reach different conclusions about you
know from looking at those problems and
I we probably have more in common with
the average American or person in the
world who's just not even thinking about
it at all is eating processed and
refined crap and dozens more in common
with the vegans yeah the difference is
these people like the people that made
this documentary and like Joel they want
to ignore evidence it flies in the face
of what they're trying to promote and
they do it with really frustrating and
deceptive methods and that's what I
thought when I watched this film it was
hard for me to watch the whole thing
I'd watch little clips of it before and
I kind of had gotten a review of it and
knew it was all about but watching the
whole thing like sitting there going
what the fuck man come on I was on an
airplane I told you yeah because I knew
I had to be in an environment where I
couldn't just run away and turn it off
and but I was like laughing out loud in
parts and kind of like a shout out motor
part the boner part the peanut butter
deli the peanut butter sandwich because
I knew right off the bat you know there
were just a lot of things that weren't
were we're funny if but sad well Chris
thank you for doing this and James will
have you on if you won't really want to
do this and he's game okay I mean well
after this break down I wonder how game
he's still gonna be yeah I wonder how
game I'm gonna be like 7 and 1/2
combined hours on this I know listen
you're doing the world a gigantic
service and I truly truly appreciate it
thank you
tell people one more time the website
kressler dot CEO slash game changers for
all the references bibliography studies
in the show notes Chris Kresser on
Twitter and Instagram while I say
Twitter that way twitter twitter and
instagram as well say nothing or those
places Thank You Chris really show thank
you bye everybody
[Music]